This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000168 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS AS INFO: SOUTH AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT 
COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE 
DRL FOR JENNIFER PEKKINEN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL ELAB KDEM KPAO KSEP MZ DHRF
SUBJECT: Mozambique: Supporting Human Rights and Democracy 
 
REF: State 333935 
 
¶1. Mozambique's constitutional government, headed by 
President Joaquim Chissano, held its second general 
multiparty elections in 1999. President Chissano was 
elected in generally free and fair elections. Chissano and 
the leadership of FRELIMO, which have ruled the country 
since independence in 1975, dominate policymaking and 
implementation. Mozambique's second municipal elections, 
held on November 19 2003,, were generally free and fair and 
occurred without violence. FRELIMO dominated the November 
elections, winning 28 out of the country's 33 
municipalities. Presidential elections will be held in 2004. 
The Government's human rights record remained poor; although 
there were some improvements in several areas, serious 
problems remained. Police continued to commit numerous 
abuses, including unlawful killings, beatings in custody, 
and arbitrary arrests and detentions. Prison conditions 
remained extremely harsh and life threatening. Despite 
efforts to clear long-standing case backlogs, prison 
overcrowding was widespread and lengthy pretrial detention 
was common. The courts were dominated by the executive 
branch, lacked adequate resources, were chronically 
understaffed, and largely ineffectual. Corruption continued 
to be a problem in the public and private sectors. Domestic 
violence against women, as well as widespread discrimination 
against women in employment and property rights, remained 
significant problems. There were confirmed reports that 
women and children were trafficked to South Africa. 
 
¶2. US efforts to support human rights and democracy in 
Mozambique have focused on strengthening key institutions, 
enhancing civil society, and addressing corruption at all 
levels. The Embassy has been actively engaged in increasing 
the professionalism of the police and reforming the 
judiciary. US officials have routinely engaged religious and 
business leaders, domestic civil society groups and 
government officials on human rights concerns, including 
trafficking in persons, HIV/AIDS, and corruption. 
 
¶3. To foster a more professional police force and reduce 
human rights abuses among the police, the Embassy used INL 
funding for an intermittent long-term International Criminal 
Investigative Training Program (ICITAP) advisor to assist 
Mozambique's Police Sciences Academy (ACIPOL) in management 
and curriculum development and to coordinate specialized 
training courses. INL funds are also paying for improved 
facilities. As a result of US and other international 
assistance, ACIPOL will graduate its first group of students 
in 2004. INL funded key police officials and officials from 
the Attorney General's office to participate in courses at 
the International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in Roswell, 
New Mexico and the regional ILEA academy in Botswana. PA 
utilized Speaker Program participants to hold a series of 
lectures on police ethics. 
 
¶4. Recognizing that corruption is a principal impediment to 
Mozambique's economic development and democratic 
consolidation, USAID used DA and ESF funds to improve the 
country's judicial system and more effectively address 
corruption. USAID has actively supported the Anti-Corruption 
Unit (UAC), including paying rental of UAC's office space 
and provision of equipment, computers and vehicles. INL 
funded three trips of Department of Justice/Overseas 
Prosecutorial Development, Assistance and Training(OPDAT) 
short-term advisors to assist the UAC in developing skills 
and tracking cases. Training was also conducted in Maputo 
involving experts from OPDAT, FBI, and Treasury. An indirect 
result of US assistance and attention to corruption was the 
passage by the National Assembly of the long-awaited Anti- 
Corruption Law, which aims to fight corruption in government 
offices, hospitals, schools, and the police. USAID also 
continued use to DA funds to raise public awareness about 
corruption and citizens rights through assistance to a local 
NGO on a planned media campaign. This NGO is also working 
with the UAC to open reporting centers in all ten provincial 
capitals with toll-free hotlines for reporting corruption. 
 
¶5. The Embassy, through an inter-agency agreement with the 
Department of Labor, is working to improve industrial 
relations in Mozambique. Activities have included training 
programs that have been furnished by the US Federal 
Mediation & Conciliation Service (FMCS), covering mediation 
techniques as well as techniques for collaborative labor 
relations. In September, a 4-Day Train-the-Trainer Course 
was held with several trainers and 30 student participants 
from unions, management and government. 
The Department of Labor is also funding a US NGO to raise 
awareness of HIV/AIDS in the workplace and reduce 
discrimination. 
 
¶6. Especially relevant due to the 2003 municipal elections 
and 2004 national elections, US government efforts in 
promoting democracy continued to be quite strong. USAID has 
used DA and ESF funds to support both international and 
local NGOs. With the assistance of US funding, an 
international organization provided observers, carried out a 
parallel vote tabulation in partnership with Mozambican non- 
governmental organizations, and monitored the post-election 
process. The group found that Mozambique's second municipal 
elections were well conducted and peaceful, with no major 
problems likely to affect the results. The Embassy used both 
Democracy and Human Rights Funds (DHRF) and USAID funds to 
support seminars for civil society on civic education. 
Embassy officials actively participated with the UNDP and 
other diplomatic missions in the coordination of 
international observers for the November 19 municipal 
elections and Embassy staff served as observers in key 
municipalities during the elections. The Embassy has also 
actively engaged officials from smaller political parties. 
 
¶7. Mozambique is a country of origin for trafficked women 
and children and there is growing attention among government 
and civil society to the problem. US officials are working 
with NGOs and government officials to develop more effective 
mechanisms to address trafficking and better coordinate 
existing efforts. This year, several DHRF grants were 
awarded for activities that focus specifically on 
trafficking and women's issues, including training seminars 
for police and immigration officials. 
 
¶8. The Mission also sent various community members and 
Mozambique government officials on International Visitor 
Programs in 2003, including in the areas of democracy, civic 
education, and HIV/AIDS awareness. 
 
¶9. Addendum. For 2003, funding for democracy and human 
rights projects of over $100,000 included: 
¶1. INL - $250,000 for Police Sciences Academy (ACIPOL). 
¶2. INL - $275,000 for Anti-Corruption Unit (UAC). 
¶3. USAID (ESF) - $500,000 for elections activities. 
¶4. USAID (DA) - $550,000 for anti-corruption activities. 
¶5. DOL - $300,000 to improve labor relations. 
¶6. DOL - $900,000 (multi-year) for various projects to 
address HIV/AIDS in the workplace. 
LA LIME