This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 000421 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NL OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN
SUBJECT: CODEL WEXLER FEB 22 - 24 
 
REF: SECSTATE 35536 
 
  ¶1.  Country Clearance is granted and AmEmbassy the Hague 
warmly welcomes Rep. Robert Wexler, Rep. Steve Chabot and 
Jonathan Katz to The Netherlands February 22-24,2004. 
 
¶2.  Kami Witmer will be the Control Officer.  She can be 
reached at the following numbers/addresses:  Tel: (W) 
31-70-310-9339, (H) 31-70-354-0639, (M) 31-65-172-4767.  Fax: 
(W) 31-70-310-9348.  Email:  (W) witmerka@state.gov; (H) 
kwit88@hotmail.com.  Please note:  When dialing telephone/fax 
numbers within the Netherlands, replace country code 31 with 
a zero. 
 
POST ACCESS: 
 
¶3. Visitors who need unescorted access into secure areas of 
the Mission must provide proof of at least a secret 
clearance.  If level of clearance was not provided in the 
original country clearance request it should include SSN, and 
the name of the agency granting the security clearance. 
Cables must include the ASEC tag to ensure distribution to 
the RSO office. 
 
 
COMPUTER and ELECTRONICS USAGE: 
 
¶4.  Inter-agency security standards prohibit the introduction 
or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software at all 
USG diplomatic facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all 
secure areas of the Mission. 
 
¶5.  Travelers who anticipate having special needs in terms of 
either access or computer usage should contact the RSO office 
before arriving at post. 
 
SECURITY ADVISORY: 
 
¶6.  Post provides the following threat assessment for The 
Netherlands: The Department of State on November 21, 2003 
issued a worldwide caution.  The U.S. Government remains 
deeply concerned about the  U.S. citizens overseas.  U.S. 
citizens are cautioned to maintain a high level of vigilance, 
to remain alert and to take appropriate steps to increase 
their security awareness.  We are seeing increasing 
indications that Al-Qaida is preparing to strike U.S. 
interests abroad.  Al-Qaida and its associated organizations 
have struck in the Middle East in Rijadh, Saudi Arabia and in 
Europe in Istanbul, Turkey.  We therefore assess that other 
geographic locations could be venues for the next round of 
attacks.  We expect Al-Qaida will strive for new attacks 
designed to be more devastating than the September 11 attack, 
possibly involving non-conventional weapons such as chemical 
or biological agents.  We also cannot rule out that Al-Qaida 
will attempt a second catastrophic attack within the U.S. 
 
Terrorist actions may include, but are not limited to, 
suicide operations, hijackings, bombings or kidnappings. 
These may also involve commercial aircraft and maritime 
interests, and threats to include conventional weapons, such 
as explosive devices.  Terrorists do not distinguish between 
official and civilian targets.  These may include facilities 
where U.S. citizens and other foreigners congregate or visit, 
including residential areas, clubs, restaurants, places of 
worship, schools, hotels, outdoor recreation events or 
resorts and beaches.  U.S. citizens should remain in a 
heightened state of personal security awareness when 
attendance at such locations is unavoidable.  Please consult 
the Department's web site for text:  http://travel.state.gov. 
 
 
A concern for visitors is crime.  Most crimes against 
official Americans are limited to pick-pocketing and luggage 
theft.  Vandalism to and theft from automobiles and  hotel 
rooms are not unknown.  Recently, theft of laptop computers 
has increased, especially at Schiphol Airport and major train 
stations.  The thieves operate in small groups that target 
travelers, are determined and well practiced at distraction 
theft.  Several official travelers have been victimized 
lately, losing personal and unclassified government 
computers, valuable software and data.  Travelers are 
reminded regulations require the use of the diplomatic pouch 
for shipment of classified equipment and information. 
 
Streets can be walked in relative safety, but as in any U.S. 
urban area, caution should be exercised after dark in the 
more populated cities of The Hague, Amsterdam, and Rotterdam. 
 Red-light districts and public transportation hubs are 
common locations for incidents of street crime. 
SOBEL