This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000107 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OFFICIAL INFORMAL 
 
FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  01/21/14 
TAGS: AMGT CE MV
SUBJECT:  OFFICIAL INFORMAL NUMBER 008 (01/21/04) 
 
Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead for reasons 1.5 
b and d. 
 
CONTENTS: ISRAELI AMBASSADOR COMES CALLING 
          AMBASSADOR'S CHAT WITH MORAGODA 
          HUMAN RIGHTS/DEMOCRACY FUNDING FOR MALDIVES? 
          PLANS FOR NATIONAL DAY IN MALE' 
          TWO MORE CHURCH ATTACKS 
 
ISRAELI AMBASSADOR COMES CALLING 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Israeli Ambassador David Danieli (based in New 
Delhi), in town to present credentials to CBK, called on the 
Ambassador January 21.  Danieli was accompanied by Mordehai 
Amihai, Director of the Israeli Foreign Ministry  South and 
Southeast Asia Department.  DCM sat in.  Danieli noted that 
Israel has previously covered from Bangkok; the shift to 
Delhi had just taken place with his arrival six months ago. 
He noted as well that this is the third time Israel and Sri 
Lanka have had relations.  Relations were first established 
in 1958 but cut by the GSL in 1970.  Started up again in 
1984 but then the plug was pulled again by Premadasa. 
Danieli said his government is very happy with the 
relationship.  SL embassy in Tel Aviv has just added a 
commercial attache amid hopes that commercial ties will grow 
(two-way trade in 2002 was $75 million, mostly in gems). 
GSL Commerce Minister Ravi K and others have been to Tel 
Aviv; Danieli trying to arrange for "one of our economics 
ministers" to come to Colombo sometime in the next year. 
According to Danieli, Israeli population here totals fewer 
than half a dozen.  Danieli said he had had a useful session 
with Foreign Ministry Secretary Bernard Goonitileke who, 
Danieli said, had pledged that he would order a review of 
GSL voting on Israeli issues in international fora.  (The 
GSL was recently helpful on the Israeli credentials issue at 
the UN).  Danieli also met with FM Fernando who pushed his 
own UNSYG candidacy; Danieli said he will try to get 
Fernando to Tel Aviv as well.  We shared our views on the 
local situation.  (DCM) 
 
AMBASSADOR'S CHAT WITH MORAGODA 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador met Jan. 21 with Minister Milinda 
Moragoda.  Here are some key snippets: 
-- Moragoda is planning to go to India later this week, with 
instructions from the PM to "show flexibility" when the 
Indians pressure the GSL for a swift resolution to the 
cohabitation crisis.  He is slated to meet National Security 
Adviser Mishra and Indian External Affairs Minister Sinha 
during the visit.  Sinha applied heavy pressure to the 
President at the recent SAARC summit in Islamabad, Moragoda 
said. 
-- The President is showing some interest in an Indian 
proposal, centered on giving the PM control over "north/east 
theater military commands," as a way to resolve the impasse 
over the Defense Ministry.  The PM does not like that idea 
much, as we have reported.  That said, when the joint 
President/PM committee meets, the PM has asked his 
representative (Malik Samarawickrama) to "try to give the 
President some comfort" on other issues and not focus on the 
Defense Ministry matter.  (Note:  Moragoda thought the joint 
committee would be meeting today, but we have heard it may 
not.  It was supposed to meet yesterday, as we mentioned to 
you in our o/i, but the meeting was postponed.) 
-- Asked about the GSL Defense Ministry team sent to New 
Delhi last week to discuss defense cooperation, Moragoda 
said the GSL never received a briefing of what transpired 
from the President's side.  Moragoda said the Indian High 
Commission briefed him, however. 
-- FYI:  Moragoda did not seem too worried over the SLFP/JVP 
alliance (see his comments in our front-channel today). 
-- On economic matters, Moragoda said the GSL is concerned 
about the recent IMF visit which apparently raised serious 
concerns about revenue projections.  Drought and consequent 
electricity shortages, increasing commodity prices 
(petroleum, fertilizer, etc), and currency depreciation will 
likely cause the government to wobble in the face of 
pressure for increased subsidies.  Moragoda thought the best 
strategy for dealing with the problem was to "come clean" 
with the IMF in order to remain credible.  Moragoda's 
argument is that the IMF will be more willing to work with 
the GSL if the government admits up front to not hitting its 
fiscal targets.  Moragoda added that the PM had not agreed 
to this idea as of yet.  We are reviewing the issues 
Moragoda raised with a skeptical eye toward the need for 
increased subsidies.  We have a meeting scheduled with the 
IMF in the morning to discuss the visit further.  (POL/ECON) 
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS/DEMOCRACY FUNDING FOR MALDIVES? 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In discussing ways to increase our human rights 
and democracy programming in the Maldives given recent 
events there and as we develop MPP plans, our "Maldives 
team" here at the Mission discussed the possibility of using 
ESF funds there today.  Given that AID does not have a 
presence in the Maldives, however, we wonder if we could 
contract the money through them, as we do for SL programs. 
Is there another way for Mission to contract directly to do 
democracy-building projects in the Maldives?  We also 
understand that DRL has some contracting authority, and 
intend to discuss the matter with DRL officer Saba Ghori 
during her visit to Colombo next week.  We have a "rule of 
law" project being implemented with the Maldives now by PAO 
and we are also interested in using PD funding on other 
projects if we can.  Any information you could glean for us 
on this matter would be extremely helpful.  With the startup 
of the GoRM's human rights commission and other tentative 
steps toward democratization being considered there, we 
think the USG should be "present at the creation," if at all 
possible.  Thanks.  (POL) 
 
PLANS FOR NATIONAL DAY IN MALE' 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) We are mulling over plans to host our national day 
celebration in the Maldives during the March timeframe, as 
hosting both receptions (in Colombo and in Male') in July is 
problematic (in the past, we have had a "Presidents' Day" 
reception in Male' in February, for example).  Seeing that 
Jim Waller has never been to the Maldives (if we recall 
correctly), we wonder if he would be interested in attending 
this key function and participating in meetings with the 
GoRM around that timeframe.  There is also plenty of things 
to do here in Sri Lanka given the ongoing cohabitation 
impasse, the SLFP/JVP pact, the planned Provincial Council 
elections slated for early April, etc.  Please give it a 
thought. (POL) 
 
TWO MORE CHURCH ATTACKS 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) FYI.  In towns just to the east of Colombo, two 
Catholic churches were attacked in the past week.  There 
were no injuries in either the January 15 or January 18 
attacks, but church property was damaged in both incidents. 
Police are investigating the attacks, but have not been able 
to make any arrests (which is a consistent theme in these 
church attacks).  (POL) 
 
LUNSTEAD