This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HANOI 000174 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, H 
STATE PASS USAID FOR ANE: AFERRARA DMCCLUSKEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP PHUM ETRD EAID VM RELFREE HUMANR HIV AIDS
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL MCCORMICK'S TRIP TO HANOI: EXPANDING 
THE U.S.-VIETNAM RELATIONSHIP 
 
REF  A: 03 HANOI 842  B: 03 HANOI 3373 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:   During Staffdel McCormick's official 
meetings January 6-8 with the Vietnamese Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (MOFA), National Assembly (NA), 
Government Committee on Religious Affairs (CRA), and 
Office of the Government (OOG), the delegation agreed on 
the value of an expanded U.S.-Vietnam relationship but 
expressed concerns about human rights and religious 
freedom.  In addition, the delegation met with the 
American Chamber of Commerce, Asia Foundation, the USAID- 
funded Support for Trade AcceleRation (STAR) project, and 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP).  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  A bi-partisan Congressional staff delegation led by 
James McCormick, Staff Director of the House 
International Relations Committee's (HIRC) Subcommittee 
on Asia and the Pacific, visited Hanoi January 6-8 to 
meet with GVN officials and representatives of 
development assistance organizations.  The delegation 
also included: John Walker Roberts, Deputy Chief of 
Staff, HIRC; Peter Yeo, Minority Deputy Chief of Staff, 
HIRC; and, Douglas Anderson, Counsel, HIRC Subcommittee 
on Asia and the Pacific.  The stop in Hanoi followed four 
days in Ho Chi Minh City, Da Nang, Hue, and Quang Tri 
(see septels).  In Hanoi, the Staffdel met with Vice 
Foreign Minister Nguyen Phu Binh, Vice Chairwoman of the 
NA's Economic and Budget Committee Duong Thu Huong, Vice 
Chairwoman of the NA's Foreign Affairs Committee Ton Nu 
Thi Ninh, CRA Chairman Ngo Yen Thi, and Vice Minister of 
the OOG Nguyen Quoc Huy. 
 
A NEW PHASE OF THE RELATIONSHIP 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Every Vietnamese interlocutor commented on the 
importance of the U.S.-Vietnam relationship, with VFM 
Binh calling the U.S. one of Vietnam's "top partners." 
Both sides noted recent positive developments in the 
relationship.  VFM Binh also stated that the expansion of 
military-to-military cooperation, as evidenced by the 
recent visit by the Vietnamese Minister of Defense to the 
U.S. and the U.S. ship visit to Vietnam, would continue. 
He asserted that the Vietnamese would participate in U.S. 
military programs.  However, this development would 
depend upon Vietnamese public opinion, and contentious 
issues in the relationship might affect it, he noted. 
 
¶4.  Other new areas of cooperation, including the counter- 
narcotics agreement signed during Deputy Prime Minister 
Vu Khoan's recent visit to the U.S., were touched upon in 
the meeting with OOG Vice Minister Huy, who also said 
that he welcomed negotiations on a framework agreement on 
assistance and wanted to establish a framework to 
determine long-term cooperation.  VFM Binh separately 
suggested that cooperation expand to other areas, 
including education, Vietnamese MIAs, and agent orange. 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS AND RELIGIOUS FREEDOM 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The Staffdel consistently raised U.S. concerns 
regarding human rights and religious freedom in Vietnam. 
Members stressed that increased access and provision of 
more accurate information could ensure that future 
misunderstandings are avoided.  While acknowledging the 
long-term positive trends, they emphasized that 
improvements must be made regarding problematic 
individual cases.  VFM Binh responded that the GVN 
welcomes questions, comments, and criticism and allows 
visits to sensitive areas.  When it hears reports that 
the police are abusing ethnic minorities, the GVN 
investigates and "punishes" officials, he claimed. 
 
¶6.  Vice Chairwoman Ninh commented that there are simply 
certain issues on which the U.S. and Vietnam will not 
agree.  VFM Binh separately remarked that the values and 
traditions of the U.S. and Vietnam differ.  Vietnam 
attaches more importance to community interests than to 
individual ones.  It has thus targeted much of its 
efforts at poverty reduction, using its small state 
budget to assist the poor and disadvantaged, especially 
in mountainous areas.  VFM Binh asserted that, because 
the GVN recognizes the difficulties of ethnic minorities, 
it gives them preferences in areas such as higher 
education and government employment.  Regarding religion, 
he stated that pre-1945 in the North and pre-1975 in the 
South, many conflicts took place due to discrimination by 
government administrations.  By contrast, he claimed that 
there have been no conflicts since. 
 
¶7.  Various Vietnamese officials emphasized that the 
number of religious followers has been rapidly growing in 
recent years.  CRA Chairman Thi further explained that 
the GVN's official policy is to encourage religions to 
grow, because religion is an "important part" of the 
people's spiritual life.  He stressed that the GVN 
respects religious freedoms and must "take care" of 
religions.  Furthermore, he stated that the GVN policy is 
in line with the international covenants and treaties of 
which it is a party.  VFM Binh admitted that the GVN is 
not "perfect" on these issues and that there is room for 
improvement.  Furthermore, the implementation of some GVN 
policies is not always as it wishes, he added. 
¶8.  Various GVN officials attributed the 2001 unrest in 
the central highlands to land disputes, mismanagement by 
local officials, and "foreign forces" who took advantage 
of the situation to encourage separatism.  CRA Chairman 
Thi further stated that the Southern Evangelical Church 
of Vietnam (SECV) had acted "incorrectly" by recognizing 
churches without consulting with local officials and by 
appointing untrained clergy.  VFM Binh asserted that the 
GVN reacted "calmly," not repressing demonstrations and 
only arresting "separatists."  Chairman Thi stressed that 
action had to be taken against churches in order to end 
the separatist movement.  Unfortunately, he said, there 
was some confusion between those churches involved in the 
movement and those not.  The GVN does not have a policy 
to take "harsh" actions against churches, he emphasized. 
Of those closed, twenty-four have since reopened.  Last 
year, Deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung visited the 
central highlands and churches.  Chairman Thi stated that 
he expected all religious activities in this area to 
return to "normal" soon. 
 
¶9.  Chairman Thi also discussed the United Buddhist 
Church of Vietnam (UBCV).  He claimed that the GVN has 
taken a "soft" approach even though this organization 
affects the unity and solidarity of Buddhism in Vietnam. 
Regarding Thich Huyen Quang, Chairman Thi asserted that 
the GVN had reached out to him during a productive 
meeting between him and the Prime Minister (ref A). 
However, Chairman Thi claimed that Thich Huyen Quang took 
actions immediately after this exchange that went against 
the pledge of improved Buddhist unity, even participating 
in "illegal activities."  Although the GVN respects the 
right of all Vietnamese to follow their faith, it has its 
own regulatory framework, and violators must be treaded 
in accordance with the law, he insisted. 
 
¶10.  Responding to a question about the number of 
Catholic clergy being trained (septel), Chairman Thi 
listed the number of clergy recently appointed, promoted, 
and trained.  He asserted that the supply of clergy 
depends upon the capacity of each religion and that the 
GVN does not intervene.  Those with a longer history in 
Vietnam, such as the Buddhist church, have better 
training schools and institutions.  Regardless, all 
religions are allowed to open schools and publish 
materials. 
 
¶11.  In response to the delegation's reference to 
recently convicted activist/journalist Nguyen Vu Binh 
(ref B) and conveyance of a copy of a letter from 
Representative Tom Lantos (D-CA), VFM Binh promised to 
"take note" of this case.  At the same time, he asserted 
that the courts only deal with those who have violated 
Vietnamese laws.  He acknowledged that there are some 
prohibitions in Vietnamese law that do not exist in other 
countries.  Still, providing "untrue" information to 
those outside Vietnam violated Vietnamese law, according 
to VFM Binh.  VFM Binh, Vice Chairwoman Ninh, and Vice 
Minister Huy separately emphasized that they would all 
like more visits and discussion on the issues of 
religious freedom and human rights.  VFM Binh further 
stated that he hopes the problems between the U.S. and 
Vietnam can be settled through dialogue. 
 
¶12.  During a breakfast with the American Chamber of 
Commerce, American businessmen and NGO representatives 
also raised human rights and religious freedom.  Amcham 
members expressed worry about Congressional legislation 
on these matters, stating that it could affect their work 
in Vietnam.  Furthermore, they argued that the problems 
are "limited."  Citing personal experiences, they spoke 
about their ability to worship freely in Vietnam.  Many 
also stated that Vietnamese colleagues and friends 
expressed little interest in this subject and did not 
feel their rights restricted.  Several Amcham members, 
many of whom have been in Vietnam for almost ten years, 
further commented that the human rights and religious 
freedom situation in Vietnam has continuously improved. 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
---------------------- 
 
¶13.  In meetings with representatives of the Asia 
Foundation, USAID-funded STAR project, and UNDP, the 
delegation learned about the many ways that assistance is 
being used to move Vietnam in a positive manner. 
According to Asia Foundation Rep Jonathan Stromseth, 
among numerous other projects, the Foundation is working 
to improve the administrative capacity of provincial 
governments.  USAID-funded STAR project director Steve 
Parker noted that his program noted that STAR is 
assisting Vietnam in implementing the U.S.-Vietnam 
Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA).  Collectively this 
comprehensive agreement and the STAR project, which 
requires Vietnam not only to liberalize its market but 
also to increase transparency and intellectual property 
rights protection, are bringing about real changes in 
Vietnam, he said.  Designed as a demand-driven program, 
STAR responds to GVN requests for assistance in 
implementing the BTA.  He stressed that real GVN 
commitment thus exists for executing STAR's 
recommendations.  Working with more than forty agencies, 
STAR has affected changes in areas such as the 
publication of laws, and is currently working with the 
GVN to create an administrative appeal procedure, he 
noted. 
 
¶14.  UNDP's far-reaching activities in Vietnam include 
significant work on HIV/AIDS.  In a long conversation on 
this topic (see septel regarding the delegation's visit 
to an anonymous testing site in Ho Chi Minh City), UNDP's 
Resident Representative Jordan Ryan explained the 
fundamental shift in GVN attitudes on this subject that 
has occurred over the past six months.  It would appear 
that many Ministries are beginning to understand that 
this disease could have a devastating impact if it 
remains unchecked.  Still, both the delegation and UNDP 
expressed their concern regarding a recent GVN decision 
to eliminate the National AIDS Standing Bureau and make 
Ministry of Health the lead agency on this subject. 
 
¶15.  This cable was cleared by James McCormick. 
BURGHARDT