This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000042 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, INL/C/CJ, IO/T 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  01-09-14 
TAGS: PREL SNAR CE
SUBJECT:  Colombo Plan:  Action Request regarding Drug 
Advisory Program director position 
 
Refs:  (A) Colombo-INL 01-09-04 fax 
 
-      (B) INL-Colombo 01-08-04 unclass email 
-      (B) 03 Colombo 2171, and previous (All Notal) 
 
(U) Classified by James F. Entwistle, Deputy Chief of 
Mission.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an Action Request -- Please see Para 4. 
 
¶2.  (U) REQUEST FOR CANDIDATES:  Throughout the 
Asia/Pacific region, the Colombo Plan's Drug Advisory 
Program (DAP) plays a major role in demand reduction and 
drug awareness efforts.  The tenure of the DAP's current 
director, Tay Bian How, is scheduled to expire in June 
¶2004.  Given this, the Colombo Plan Secretariat is 
soliciting nominations from its members states for 
candidates for the next DAP director.  The nomination 
for candidate request, including the position 
description and recommended candidate qualifications, 
has been sent to the Department in Ref (A). 
 
¶3.  (C) POSSIBLE EXTENSION OF INCUMBENT:  In the event 
that the Colombo Plan Secretariat does not receive 
applications for qualified candidates for the DAP 
director position, the organization has indicated to the 
U.S. that it may extend the appointment of current DAP 
director How (see Ref B).  An extension is a likely 
possibility, given a current lack of suitable 
candidates.  (Note:  Due to the diversity of the member 
states (Afghanistan to Australia) and the importance of 
community-based programs and contacts at the grassroots 
level, the DAP director must possess significant related 
experience and an extensive skill set.) 
 
¶4.  (C) During a January 9 conversation, Yasmin Raheem, 
the executive assistant to the Secretary-General, told 
poloff of another reason for the lack of nominations for 
the DAP director position.  Raheem stated that the 
Secretary-General is seeking to change the tenure of the 
 
SIPDIS 
DAP director position, from four years to two years. 
She added that the Secretary-General plans to address 
the issue regarding the length of the appointment at the 
upcoming Colombo Plan Council meeting on January 20.  As 
such, Raheem suggested that member states are possibly 
waiting to propose candidates until the tenure of the 
appointment is finalized.  Regarding an extension for 
the current DAP director, Raheem felt that an official 
request from the U.S., who is a major funder of DAP 
activities, would show to the Secretary-General and 
other member states a strong indication of support for 
such an extension. 
 
¶5.  (C) ACTION REQUEST:  Mission requests guidance on 
the following three issues: 
 
-- Mission inquires whether the Department plan to 
nominate any individual for the DAP director position. 
Nominations are due to the Colombo Plan Secretariat, in 
Colombo, by February 27, 2004. 
 
-- As the Department seems to support an extension of 
the current director's appointment (see ref B), Mission 
inquires whether the Department would consider sending a 
letter, through Mission, to the Secretary-General 
officially supporting such an extension.  Ideally, such 
a letter would be communicated to the Secretary-General 
prior to the January 20 Colombo Plan Council meeting. 
 
-- Pending discussion at the January 20 meeting of the 
Secretary-General's intent to change the tenure of the 
 
SIPDIS 
DAP director position from four years to two years, 
Mission inquires if the Department has any initial 
feedback regarding the length of the position that 
Mission could convey during the meeting. 
 
END ACTION REQUEST. 
 
¶6.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD