This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL GT AGR
SUBJECT: AGREMENT REQUEST FOR GUATEMALAN AMBASSADOR TO THE 
U.S. 
 
¶1.  On February 2 the Embassy received from the MFA a 
written request for agrement for Jose Guillermo Castillo 
Villacorta as Guatemalan Ambassador to the U.S., dated 
January 30, 2004.  The original has been pouched to WHA/CEN 
under registry #306131.  Castillo Villacorta is known well 
and favorably to the Embassy, which requests the prompt 
attention by the Department to this request. 
 
Begin Text of Note (#DIGRIB-NV-008/2004) 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations of the Republic of 
Guatemala warmly greets the honorable Embassy of the United 
States of America, and wishes to convey that the Government 
of the Republic of Guatemala, wishing to strengthen and 
deepen the fraternal links between our peoples and 
governments, has decided to nominate Jose Guillermo 
Castillo Villacorta as the next Ambassador Plenipotentiary, 
for which purpose we kindly request the corresponding 
agrement. 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Relations would greatly appreciate 
the assistance of the honorable Embassy of the United 
States of America to transmit this request to the high 
authorities of your refined country, to determine if Mr. 
Jose Guillermo Castillo Villacorta is considered welcome to 
perform the cited mission, and attaching 
for your consideration a copy of his Curriculum Vitae. 
 
Complimentary closing. 
 
End Text of Note. 
 
¶2.  Begin Text of CV 
 
Curriculum Vitae 
 
Jose Guillermo Castillo Villacorta 
 
A professional on Economics who obtained his BA "Cum Laude" 
from Universidad Francisco Marroquin in Guatemala, he was 
granted a Fulbright scholarship and obtained his Masters in 
Business Administration at J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of 
Management, Northwestern University, specializing in 
Finance, Marketing, Organizational Behavior and Accounting. 
 
His professional expertise has developed in the public 
sector as well as in the private sector.  From April 1, 
1998 through July 31, 1999, he held the office of Vice 
Minister of Economy in charge of Trade Issues, he was 
responsible for the Central American Integration Process, 
the international trade negotiations of Guatemala in 
bilateral and multilateral forums, the administration of 
the commitments derive from the International Trade 
Agreements and the project to create the National Quality 
System, among other issues. 
 
He was Minister of Economy from August 1, 1999 through 
January 14, 2000.  He worked on trade issues, regional 
integration, international trade negotiations, technical 
rules, promotion of investments, competitiveness programs, 
support to SME, and promotion of exports. 
 
During the first semester of the year 2000, as a delegate 
of the Ministry of Economy, he coordinated and concluded 
the negotiations of the Free Trade Agreement with Mexico, a 
process in which he participated from 1996 through its 
closing, playing different roles. 
 
Prior to his participation in the public sector, he was 
very active in the private sector, both in Guatemala and 
internationally.  He has worked in banking, insurance, 
bonds and the capital market, as well as in the industrial 
and commercial sectors.  In the organized private sector he 
has been Director and Treasurer of the Guatemalan Chamber 
of Industry, Coordinator of the Economic Commission of the 
business sector, delegate from the business sector in the 
Puebla - Panama Plan, Director of the Business Council for 
the International Trade Negotiations and member of the 
Executive Committee of the National Competitiveness Program 
coordinated by the Guatemalan Ministry of Economy, among 
other duties. 
 
In activities of social responsibility, he participated as 
Director of FUNDESA, Director and President of Fundes 
Guatemala and Director of the Mariano and Rafael Castillo 
Cordova Foundation.  He has also been a professor in 
Business Strategy, World Political and Economical Order, 
International Trade and Marketing, both in undergraduate 
and graduate degrees, in the most prestigious private 
universities in Guatemala, such as Universidad Francisco 
Marroquin, Universidad Rafael Landivar and Universidad del 
Istmo. 
 
At the present time he is the Director of Strategic 
Planning of Cerveceria Centroamericana, S.A., and advisor 
of foreign trade issues to different companies, and is 
vice-president of the Guatemalan Chamber of Industry. 
 
End Text of CV. 
 
HAMILTON