This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KUWAIT 000089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA 
STATE FOR IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR OFRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, DECEMBER 23-JANUARY 7: 
HALLIBURTON; SADDAM TRIAL; IRAQ'S FOREIGN DEBT; KUWAIT 
CURRICULUM REFORM; ARAB MENTALITY; CYCLE OF VIOLENCE 
 
REF: 03 KUWAIT 02704 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: In an article titled "Do Not Accept 
Colonialism," one writer claims that Iraq's oil resources 
will be controlled by "companies with strong ties to the 
American administration," specifically Halliburton who he 
writes is "accused of rigging the price of fuel sold to the 
US army." 
 
News pages report that charges filed in June against the 
editor-in-chief of Kuwait's "Al Watan" newspaper, Mohammed 
al-Jassim, for defaming the ruling family have been dropped. 
(reftel) 
 
One prominent liberal commentator states that Islamists 
oppose educational and economic reform only because the US 
supports it, ignoring the "impending economic and social 
problems" facing Kuwait. A conservative writer believes the 
US is behind Kuwaiti efforts to reform their educational 
curricula. 
 
Mohammed Al-Jassim, editor-in-chief of local daily "Al- 
Watan" and Arabic Newsweek, wrote a long discourse in the 
December 23 edition of Arabic Newsweek on the "restoration 
of the Arab mind." Al-Jassim writes that the Arab mentality 
is "based on illusions and a fabricated reality" that 
glorifies "tyrants and criminals" like Saddam Hussein. 
Changing this mentality, he continues, requires "shock 
therapy" through replaying "the images of looking for lice 
in [Saddam's] head" in the same way images of the planes 
hitting the World Trade Center were repeatedly broadcast by 
Al-Jazeera. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News stories: Justice Minister Ahmad Baqer stated that 
Kuwait has prepared 178 "files" to be handed over to the 
Iraqi Governing Council for the trial of Saddam Hussein, 
according to Al-Qabas. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports on January 4 that the Kuwaiti Minister 
of Information stated that, "When American troops leave 
Iraq, there will be no strategic reason for American troops 
to stay in Kuwait." 
 
Al-Qabas reports that Foreign Minister Sheikh Dr. Mohammed 
Al-Sabah said that GCC countries had agreed to take a 
"unified" position on Iraqi debt relief. He did not specify 
what the position would be. Al-Watan and Al-Rai Al-Aam 
report that Sheikh Dr. Al-Sabah stated that a proposed visit 
by Presidential envoy James Baker to Kuwait would be used to 
address the issue of Iraqi debt owed to Kuwait, but not 
compensations claimed by Kuwait as a result of the 1990-91 
Iraqi invasion and occupation. 
 
Iran has hailed Kuwaiti aid to victims of the earthquake at 
Bam on December 26, Al-Qabas reports. 
 
Approximately 28 thousand Iraqi pilgrims are expected to 
transit through Kuwait on their way to Hajj in Saudi Arabia, 
Al-Qabas reports. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on January 5 that the remains of 16 more 
Kuwaiti POWs have been identified through DNA testing and 
will be buried in Kuwait. 
 
The head of Shiite clerics in Kuwait, Mohammed Al-Mohri 
stated on January 5 that "frivolous music" such as jazz is 
"haram," or forbidden, but that classical music "such as 
Beethoven's Sixth Symphony" is acceptable, Al-Rai Al-Aam 
reports. 
 
Editorials 
 
¶3.  "Do Not Accept Colonialism" 
Dr. Yaser Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(1/06):  "It is well known that the American administration 
handed over, with no competition, reconstruction contracts 
in Iraq to two companies: Bechtel and Halliburton. A 
congressional investigative committee accused the latter of 
rigging the price of fuel it sold to the American army. The 
sources of Iraqi wealth will be under American control for 
many years to come, and companies with strong ties to the 
administration will be offered these resources." 
 
¶4. "The Beginning of the Division of Iraq" 
Ahmed Al-Diyeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (1/05): 
"The scenarios for dividing Iraq into smaller states is an 
issue which is raised by American NGOs that have influence 
over decision makers. When the Council on Foreign Relations 
suggests dividing Iraq into three states, the only thing we 
can say about this dangerous strategy is that it is a 
conspiracy. It is a plan to empower the Zionists in this 
region, and this was the real goal [of Operation Iraqi 
Freedom]." 
 
¶5.  "Saddam's Money" 
Dr. Yacoub Al-Sharrah wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(1/04):  "The reconstruction of Iraq can only be achieved if 
Iraq's money, estimated at thirty billion US dollars, and 
held by Saddam, is returned to the Iraqi people.  There is 
no financial obstacle to reconstruction since many countries 
are willing to donate money. The real obstacle is in the 
cohesion of the Iraqis, or lack thereof." 
 
¶6.  "The Secret Colonizer" 
Nabil Al-Fadhil wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (1/05): 
"The secret colonizer is a patriotic Islamic colonizer.  The 
practice of spreading Islamic awareness may have started 
innocuously enough through the establishment of small 
charity organizations, but it has grown into a dangerous 
giant octopus. Now, it controls the cooperative societies 
and the [Kuwait University] Students Union. [This colonizer] 
is even riding the horse of Democracy [in Parliament], 
something that they detest. Our dilemma is that if we raise 
arms against this secret colonizer in the name of national 
interest, it will provoke the sacred weapon of religion and 
Jihad." 
 
¶7.  "The Day the Ram Smashed its Horns" 
Dr. Jasem Al-Fuhaid, professor at Kuwait University, wrote 
in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (1/06):  "It would be a setback 
for the Islamic world to implement educational reforms under 
Uncle Sam's orders. Our educational officials become very 
annoyed by this accusation, alleging they are reforming 
curricula without any outside pressure. Eventually we may 
witness the reshaping of young minds so that America can 
guarantee itself that it will always have nations 
subservient to it." 
 
¶8.  "Impending Crisis" 
Dr. Shamlan Al-Issa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (1/05): 
"The scathing attacks of political Islamist MPs against the 
Minister of Education on the issue of education development 
are unjust and arbitrary. [These attacks] demonstrate 
complete ignorance of the impending economic and social 
problems that will beset us if rapid reform on curricula and 
the economy is ignored. Political Islamist MPs concentrate 
on the political aspect of the problem, in that the United 
States is the one urging the Gulf and Arab states to develop 
their political and economic systems. America's insistence 
on reform stems from one important aspect: if 
democratization and modernization fails in our countries, 
then the alternative is the rise to power of political 
Islamist groups which means continued extremism and 
violence, and that will harm the West's interests." 
 
¶9. "Restoration of the Arab Mind" 
Mohammad Abdul-Qader Al-Jassim, editor-in-chief of 
independent Al-Watan and Arabic Newsweek, wrote in Arabic 
Newsweek (12/23/03):  "When Baghdad fell to U.S. troops, 
[the Arab mind] considered Saddam's escape and disappearance 
to be a form of continued heroism. The American victory in 
Iraq reached completion with the capture of Saddam [on 
December 14]. The question is: will Arabs regain their 
sanity? Of course not. They will applaud every terrorist 
operation that takes place in Iraq and they will be jubilant 
for the death or injury of American soldiers anywhere in the 
world. The Arab mind lives in a world of illusions, lies, 
and deception. The Arab mind utilizes a fabricated reality 
due to its inability to deal with what is really going on. 
 
Saddam is a criminal, a tyrant, and a dictator. He destroyed 
his country, killed his people, and harmed his neighbors. 
This is the reality. Arabs, nonetheless, see him as a hero. 
Saddam Hussein surrendered to the American forces in a 
humiliating and subjugated fashion yet they still see pride 
and greatness in him... Kuwaitis were the most enthusiastic 
among all Arabs in championing Saddam Hussein because of his 
war with Iran. They did not stop their enthusiasm until he 
invaded them. 
 
Restoration of the Arab mind requires shock therapy. Last 
Sunday was a unique historic moment in modern Arab history 
as it represented the nadir of the degradation of the Arab 
mind. The United States must address Arabs in a language 
they understand. Al-Jazeera repeatedly broadcast images of 
the planes crashing into New York's World Trade Center, thus 
feeding the Arab mind with feelings of pride. The images of 
looking for lice in the head of the `Protector of the 
Eastern Gate' must therefore be replayed time after time, in 
order to remain in Arab memory. Maybe then the Arab mind 
will regain its balance, stability, and sense of reality. 
 
Oh Arabs, Saddam has failed you just as other leaders who 
preceded him have also failed you. They sacrificed your 
blood for their existence, even if this was done at the 
expense of your humiliation. You, on the other hand, are 
still clapping." 
 
¶10. "The End of Israel" 
Professor at Kuwait University, Dr. Hasan Abdullah Abbas 
wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (1/05):  "To those of you 
who believe that Israel in acting in self-defense, you are 
deceived. Bastard Israel is a virus implanted by colonists 
into the Arab nation. We reiterate that we will not 
recognize Israel as a state. The goal is to drive Israel out 
of Palestine. There is no other solution." 
 
¶11.  "Resistance and the Umma's [Islamic nation's] 
Conscience" 
Conservative Islamist Sami Naser Al-Khalifa wrote in 
independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (1/05):  "It is beyond doubt that 
the Palestinian resistance is the only alternative to 
recover violated rights from the Zionist occupiers. Despite 
this, some voices are calling for surrender, citing the 
reality on the ground and the disproportionate balance of 
power between the Israelis and the Palestinians as pretexts 
to cave in. However, the issue should not be evaluated in 
material terms. Throughout history, Muslims have created an 
illustrious Islamic civilization through faith and not 
materialism. For Muslims, justice is in God's hands, not in 
the hands of America or Israel." 
 
URBANCIC