This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141624Z Jan 04UNCLAS LAGOS 000074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS DOT FOR KEVIN SAMPLE 
BRUSSELS FOR TSA REP KEVIN CAHILL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON CASC SOCI ASEC AMGT NI
SUBJECT: WORLD AIRWAYS SUSPENDS SERVICE, LEAVES PASSENGERS 
STRANDED 
 
REF: (A) LAGOS 54, (B) LAGOS 31, (C) 03 ABUJA 2216 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: World Airways recently announced the 
indefinite suspension of its charter flights between the 
United States and Nigeria.  Company executives say World's 
booking agent, Ritetime Aviation and Travel Service, owes 
the airline nearly US $2 million and argue that World cannot 
continue to operate charters without being paid. 
Unfortunately, this leaves 800 to 1,000 people stranded in 
Lagos with tickets that cannot be used on other airlines. 
Many have waited nearly two weeks in the hope that Ritetime 
would make good on its promises to send a plane, but as of 
17:00 Wednesday, January 14, no aircraft has appeared. 
Airport contacts reported random acts of violence on 
Tuesday, January 13, and stranded AmCit passengers say that 
the offices of Ritetime and World were ransacked the same 
day, but no violence has occurred since then.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) World Airways announced the cancellation of its 
charter flights between the United States and Nigeria 
effective January 1, 2004.  In its press release, World 
named Ritetime Aviation and Travel Service the "contractor 
and sole marketing agent" for its charter flights and said 
it had "no control over Ritetime's ticket sales or 
reservations," particularly when Ritetime sold tickets for 
flights beyond the December 31 expiration of its contract 
with World.  The press release also stated that Ritetime had 
"not made its payments to World Airways."  Under the 
circumstances, World executives say they had no choice but 
to discontinue services.  The Nigerian Civil Aviation 
Authority sent a scathing message to World Airways calling 
on the airline to honor its commitment to passengers "to 
avert even more ugly scenes which can jeopardize good 
relations," but World executives chose not to respond to the 
letter. 
 
¶3. (U) The airline's decision leaves 800 to 1,000 people 
stranded, all of them holding charter tickets that cannot be 
used on other airlines.  Twenty-nine people returned to the 
United States on a Transatlantic Airlines flight, and others 
may board charter flights from Lagos to Accra and from there 
to New York later this week, but many stranded passengers 
are still looking for a way home.  International flights 
from Lagos are almost completely booked until mid-January. 
In its press release, World Airways expressed its "genuine 
apologies for any inconvenience" but said there was nothing 
it could do.  Company executives say World will not send 
rescue flights, particularly when passengers in Lagos and 
New York are becoming increasingly agitated.  As of Tuesday, 
January 13, there appeared to be a solution: Ritetime has 
allegedly chartered a European Airways plane to ferry 
passengers from Lagos to Accra and on to New York at no 
extra charge.  However, as of 17:00 Wednesday, January 14, 
no aircraft has appeared. 
 
¶4. (U) Comment: World Airways executives have expressed 
interest in finding another booking agent and re-introducing 
charter flights in four to six months - the Lagos-New York 
route is potentially one of the airline's most lucrative - 
but World's damaged reputation will make this difficult. 
The Nigerian press has repeatedly castigated the airline, 
GON officials have expressed disappointment in World's 
decision to cancel its flights, and the Nigerian Civil 
Aviation Authority has expressed anger at the airline's 
refusal to rescue stranded passengers.  World Airways 
executives will meet GON officials later this month, but 
even this may not be enough to salvage the airline's 
reputation.  Whether or not World re-enters the market, 
other U.S. air carriers are lining up to take its place. 
Continental Airlines has made serious inquiries, and KLM 
reports that Northwest will start a Lagos to Detroit run in 
June or July 2004.  End comment. 
 
HINSON-JONES