This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 THE HAGUE 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AC/CB, NP/CBM, VC/CCB, L/ACV, IO/S 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISP 
JOINT STAFF FOR DD PMA-A FOR WTC 
COMMERCE FOR BIS (GOLDMAN) 
NSC FOR CHUPA 
WINPAC FOR LIEPMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL CWC
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC):  WRAP-UP FOR 2 
JAN 
 
 
This is CWC-1-04. 
 
--------------- 
Data Automation 
--------------- 
 
¶1.  (U)  Canadian representative Peter van Brakel briefly 
raised the U.S. push on TS data automation with del.  He 
noted Canada's support of the U.S. initiative and said that 
Canada had been submitting its redacted industry data 
declarations via electronic means (CD-ROM) for some time. 
French and UK reps also indicated that their industrial data 
declarations were submitted via CD-ROM, and France added that 
its authorities collected all their data in electronic format 
but were not permitted to share it all with the TS.  All 
three delegations indicated that TS data handling security 
issues prevented their submission of complete industry 
declarations via electronic means and welcomed the day when 
TS automation efforts were completed to the satisfaction of 
 
SIPDIS 
all States Parties. 
 
-------------- 
Future Budgets 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  The UK, French, and Canadian representatives all 
anticipate that OPCW budgets would have to continue to rise 
significantly to accommodate increasing inspection demands. 
They agree that the possible efficiency savings of 
introducing on-call inspectors, increasing automation, etc., 
cannot not offset increasing demands to verify destruction 
activities, combined with the need to maintain or increase 
industry inspections, and the anticipated demands for 
inspections of new States Parties (such as Libya).  The three 
reps recognize that the TS has reached the same conclusion in 
preparing the draft Medium Term Plan, which forecasts falling 
inspection activity unless budgets continue to rise. 
 
----------------- 
Off-Site Analysis 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  During a brief discussion regarding the recent UK 
proposal on the presence of a State Party observer during 
off-site analysis, the French representative indicated France 
cannot support the UK proposal.  Specifically, the UK 
proposal still allows analysis to be conducted without an 
observer present, should there be political or technical 
problems associated with entry of the observer to the 
laboratory or country where analysis is being conducted. 
France contends States Parties have the right to be present 
during the "verification activity" of off-site analysis 
because of its direct bearing on the findings of any 
inspection report. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Updated Calendar of Universality Events 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U)  Drawing on conversations with officials of the 
External Relations Division and other delegations, Del has 
updated the list of Universality events proposed for 2004. 
The calendar below draws from the paper distributed by the 
Technical Secretariat on November 26, including new events 
that have been scheduled, and correcting dates that have 
firmed up or slipped back.  We have also noted some events 
that have come under discussion as good fora to promote 
Universality.  These proposals may be discussed at a January 
13 meeting between TS and SP Points of Contact and other 
interested SPs, although the agenda of that meeting will 
focus more on the role and identity of POCs. 
 
------------- 
January-March 
------------- 
 
- TS meetings with Brussels (late January) and London 
(February) missions of States not Party to encourage greater 
involvement with OPCW activities (to be repeated in 4th 
quarter). 
 
- Cambodia bilateral assistance visit (by UK National 
Authority) -- Phnom Penh, Cambodia, January-February. 
 
- West Africa regional workshop for National Authorities 
(possible forum; not focused on Universality per se) -- 
Dakar, Senegal, February 24-26. 
 
- Rwanda bilateral assistance visit (by TS to advance 
ratification process) -- Kigali, Rwanda, February-March. 
 
- Solomon Islands bilateral assistance visit (by TS to assist 
accession) -- Honiara, Solomon Islands, 1st quarter. 
 
---------- 
April-June 
---------- 
 
- Africa regional universality workshop for States not Party 
(TS in cooperation with African Union Secretariat)  (NOTE: 
South African delegate Makwarela has repeatedly questioned 
whether this proposal has AU support.  TS insists that it 
does.) -- Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April. 
 
- ASEAN Regional Forum (possible forum for TS and/or certain 
States Parties to pitch universality) Inter-Sessional Support 
Group meeting on CBMs -- Rangoon, Myanmar, April. 
 
- Middle East-Mediterranean-Asia regional universality 
workshop for States Not Party (NOTE: EU plans to use this 
event to launch universality push in the Middle East) -- 
Malta, May. 
 
- Myanmar bilateral assistance visit (TS in conjunction with 
UNDDA project) -- Rangoon, Myanmar, 2nd quarter. 
 
- Angola bilateral assistance visit (by TS to assist 
accession) -- Luanda, Angola, 2nd quarter. 
 
- Bhutan bilateral assistance visit (by TS and States Parties 
to assist ratification) -- Thimphu, Bhutan, 2nd quarter. 
 
-------------- 
July-September 
-------------- 
 
- ASEAN Regional Forum (possible forum for TS and/or certain 
States Parties to raise universality) ARF Ministerial -- 
Jakarta, Indonesia, July 26-30. 
 
- Organization of Eastern Caribbean States sub-regional 
meeting for States not Party (TS in cooperation with OECS 
Secretariat) -- Castries, Saint Lucia, 3rd quarter. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
- Honduras and Dominican Republic bilateral assistance visit 
(TS in conjunction with UN Regional Disarmament Center) -- 
Honduras and Dominican Republic, 3rd quarter. 
 
- Comoros bilateral assistance visit (TS to assist 
ratification) -- Moroni, Comoros, 3rd quarter. 
 
- D.R. Congo bilateral assistance visit (TS to assist 
ratification) -- Kinshasa, DRC, 3rd quarter. 
 
- Asia National Authorities' second regional meeting (States 
not Party to be invited) -- Beijing, China, September. 
 
---------------- 
October-December 
---------------- 
 
- UNGA (Visit by DG to First committee and bilateral meetings 
with States not Party) -- New York, October. 
 
- States not Party Missions in The Hague induction workshop 
and briefings -- The Hague, November. 
 
- TS follow-up meetings with the London or Brussels missions 
of States not Party to encourage greater SNP involvement with 
OPCW activities -- London and Brussels, 4th quarter. 
 
- CSP-9 (States not Party to be invited for bilateral 
meetings) -- The Hague, November 29-December 3. 
¶5.  (U)  Ito sends. 
 
RUSSEL