This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000016 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/BCLTV; 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KDEM BM NLD
SUBJECT: ANTIDOTE TO THE REGIME: THE DEMOCRACY MOVEMENT'S 
QUIET DETERMINATION 
 
REF: RANGOON 13 
 
Classified By: CDA, a.i. Ronald McMullen for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: On January 4, the 56th anniversary of Burma's 
independence, pro-democracy political parties and supporters 
held quiet, but well-attended, commemorative events in 
Rangoon.  In contrast to the regime's official ceremonies, 
heavily militarized functions that trumpeted the SPDC's 
self-proclaimed accomplishments (reftel), the pro-democracy 
events emphasized Burma's early struggle for independence and 
democracy and the unfinished business of achieving a 
government "for the people and by the people."  Hundreds of 
party members and supporters braved the intimidating presence 
of military intelligence agents to be seen and counted at 
events sponsored by the Veteran Politicians and the NLD.  End 
Summary. 
 
The Veterans: Return Power to the People 
 
¶2. (U) Early on independence day, the Veteran Politicians, a 
pro-democracy association of former government and military 
officials, hosted a ceremony attended by over 400 guests and 
representatives of political parties and organizations. 
Among the attendees were several elderly survivors of the 
"We-Burma Association" (a nationalist movement founded in the 
1930s), members of the NLD Central Executive Committee, 
representatives of the UNLD and UNA (ethnic democracy 
coalitions), Members-Elect of Parliament, and members of the 
Committee to Represent the People's Parliament (CRPP).  The 
U.S. Embassy was the only diplomatic mission in attendance at 
the Veterans' ceremony, which was held in the warehouse of 
privately owned Rangoon factory. 
 
¶3. (U) Thakin Thein Pe, Chairman of the Veteran Politicians, 
criticized the regime for repression and harassment and 
called for an investigation into the May 30 Depeyin attack on 
NLD leader Aung San Suu Kyi.  He expressed hope that in the 
new year the "people's power" would be returned to the people 
of Burma, but questioned whether the regime's "road map" 
would achieve reconciliation given unresolved issues 
associated with the National Convention abandoned in 1996. 
 
¶4. (U) In a "Commemorative Appeal," the Veterans reissued 
their 1999 call for tripartite talks among the SPDC, the NLD, 
and the ethnic nationalities; criticized the regime for 
ignoring the results of the 1990 elections; and called for 
the unconditional release of all political prisoners. 
 
The NLD: Regaining Independence 
 
¶5. (U) Following the Veterans' ceremony, the NLD held a 
religious ceremony at a monastery in central Rangoon.  Over 
700 party members and supporters attended the event (we were 
again the only diplomatic mission in attendance).  The 
monastery's abbot delivered a passionate sermon in which he 
muted direct criticism of the SPDC, but cited the Buddha's 
pursuit of spiritual independence as a model for the current 
struggle to achieve basic freedoms. 
 
¶6. (U) NLD CEC member U Than Tun responded to the sermon with 
a brief speech in which he criticized the regime's closing of 
party offices.  He described Buddhism as the country's only 
reliable institution, having survived both the British and 
the Japanese, and noted that religion (as opposed to the 
military regime) is capable of helping the Burmese "regain" 
their independence. 
 
¶7. (U) In an independence day declaration, the NLD called for 
national reconciliation and dialogue, recalling that the 
Burmese people had voted for the NLD 1990 with an 
"overwhelming" desire to restore democratic rights lost when 
the military seized power in 1962. 
 
Comment: Question Authority - One Day at a Time 
 
¶8. (C) These quiet pro-democracy events paled in comparison 
to the radical demonstrations of the late 1980s and pro-NLD 
independence day rallies in previous years.  However, it is 
remarkable that hundreds of political party members and 
supporters turned out this year given the regime's heightened 
repression of political dissent.  Indeed, military 
intelligence agents were active at both functions, filming 
all speeches and participants, including several NLD members 
recently released from prison.  Pro-democracy activists, 
unable to meet at shuttered NLD headquarters and subject to 
arbitrary arrest, found welcome refuge with the Veteran 
politicians and at the monastery.  This was a rare 
opportunity to defy the authorities - if just for a day. End 
comment. 
McMullen