This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
State pass to USTR EBRYAN 
UADOC for 6500 and 4431/MAC/AP/OPB/VLC/HPPHO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD VM IPROP
SUBJECT: ACROBATS, BEER BELLIES AND FLOATS - VIETNAM HONORS 
TRADEMARKS 
 
¶1.  Although counterfeit and pirated goods are readily available 
virtually everywhere in Vietnam, government and business is more 
and more realizing the importance and value of brands and 
trademarks.  On January 30, Ho Chi Minh City organized a "Festival 
Honoring Vietnamese Trademarks" which was hosted by the Chairman 
of the HCMC People's Committee and broadcast on primetime 
television.  The Festival was a parade of 34 floats representing 
some of the country's most famous trademarks.  Several firms were 
given awards.  "This is the way in which we express our gratitude 
to the businesses which have made contributions to the city and 
the nation," remarked Chairman Le Thanh Hai in his opening speech. 
 
¶2.  Thousands of people - some ringers for the companies 
participating  - lined the parade route and clapped and cheered. 
Floats represented companies such as Trung Nguyen Coffee, whose 
minivan fit inside an enormous sculpted elephant led by a team of 
ethnic minority acrobats.  Agifish, a large seafood company, was 
represented by a giant basa fish.  Saigon Beer impressed everyone 
with truth in advertising -- their float was preceded by a smiling 
man with an artificially-padded beer belly.   It was not just 
bellies that were big - Viet Tien garments had a group of marching 
giant shirts, complete with giant Viet Tien labels.  Bitis, a 
local shoe company, had, of course, a giant shoe.  The audience 
was also treated to a giant wrench, an enormous pencil, and a 
vehicle-sized t-pot (from Minh Long I).  The most unusual float, 
however, was a huge pair of toenail clippers from Nghia Nippers. 
Private and state-owned companies participated, and Kymdan Co. 
hedged its bet by erecting a large hammer and sickle atop its 
float that was largely dedicated to foam - its primary product. 
After giant toenail clippers, the traditional dragon dances, 
marching fashion models, and ethnic drummers gave a more 
traditional feel to some of the entries. 
 
¶3.  The event could not have been mistaken for the Rose Bowl 
Parade, but the crowds had an enormous amount of fun.  So, 
evidently, did the CEOs of some of the participating companies. 
The Chairman of Dapha, a private bottled-water company, personally 
directed his company's float along the parade route.  Dressed 
entirely in black, he paced his employees through their dance 
routine and gave the order to launch the balloons at just the 
right moment. 
 
¶4.  Crowd control was a bit crude, however.  A couple of blocks 
beyond the main reviewing stand, police were having difficulty 
moving crowds back from the parade route.  In an isolated 
incident, the police simply got out their electric cattle prods, 
which after a few applications, quickly cleared the route. 
 
¶5.  Comment:  This parade did not make international headlines, 
but it did serve to remind that the HCMC government recognizes the 
important role that business plays in the city's  development.  It 
was a beginner's attempt to popularize the concept of trademark 
protection (all of the floats featured "Quality crafted with pride 
in Vietnam" seals of approval).  The ceremony and parade also 
illustrated that Vietnamese government, business, and consumers 
are becoming more brand conscious and are aware of the value of 
protecting brands and trademarks.  It is a long way from a 
trademark parade to pro-active IPR protection for local and 
foreign rights holders, but HCMC has made this first official 
"populist" effort to educate its residents. 
 
YAMAUCHI