This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131406Z Jan 04C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 000211 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
EUCOM FOR J3, J4 AND J5 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2014 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS KPAO TU IZ
SUBJECT: USG-SOURCED WALL STREET JOURNAL ARTICLE MIXES 
GLOBAL DEFENSE POSTURE AND INCIRLIK TROOP ROTATIONS, 
COMPLICATING COOPERATION WITH TURKS 
 
 
REF: A. (A) ANKARA 7800 
     ¶B. (B) ANKARA 7735 
     ¶C. (C) ANKARA 4841 
 
 
(U)   Classified by Ambassador Eric S. Edelman.  Reasons: 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  A January 9 article in the Wall Street 
Journal that quotes U.S. officials and misleadingly links the 
review of U.S. global defense posture to the commencement of 
the rotation of U.S. troops to and from Iraq through the 
Incirlik Air Base was ill-timed and has complicated the 
Mission's ability to work with the government of Turkey on 
both issues.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (U) Citing senior Department of Defense officials, the 
article that appeared in the European edition of the Wall 
Street Journal on January 9, ties the agreement to "reopen" 
Incirlik Air Base to the review of global U.S. defense 
posture, including the repositioning of U.S. ground forces 
from Germany.  The article confirms that troop rotations 
through Incirlik began last week and quotes U.S. officials as 
saying the U.S. would like to return to Incirlik in a more 
permanent way, including transiting troops through on 
exercises and using the base in other military operations. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) The same day, the Turkish media quickly distorted the 
news further, with television reporting that Washington and 
Ankara had reached agreement on the opening of an additional 
"new base" in Turkey and using Incirlik for the shipment of 
munitions.  The following day's print media compounded the 
WSJ's muddling of the two stories, claiming that the U.S. was 
planning to move troops from Europe to bases at Incirlik and 
Konya. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) The Government of Turkey, while forthcoming in the 
arrangement to use Incirlik for troop rotations and open to 
deepening strategic cooperation with the U.S. in its effort 
to repair diplomatic and military ties, emphasized to us on 
December 19 (reftel A) its preference to handle the troop 
rotation issue in a low-key manner.  In a January 2 meeting, 
the Ambassador and Prime Minister Erdogan agreed to maintain 
a low profile on the rotations due to force protection 
concerns and in deference to Turkish public opinion 
sensitivities. 
 
 
¶5.  (U) When the commencement of troop rotations became a 
major news story, the GOT was forced to acknowledge the 
operations publicly.  The discussion is growing with some 
questioning the legality ofthe autorization.  The Embassy and 
the MFA are emphasizing that Incirlik is being used in 
accordance with Turkish law and in full compliance with 
mutually agreed guidelines for the use of the facility.  The 
MFA's press guidance also notes that the rotations are in 
accordance with the Council of Ministers direction of June 
2003 on the use of Turkish bases and ports for support of 
coalition operations in Iraq and are within the framework of 
UNSCR 1483.  The Embassy and MFA are stating that the troops 
are in transit-only status as they move through Incirlik, and 
we are not confirming operational details or troop numbers. 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Comment:  While we would have preferred that the GOT 
adopt a more forward-leaning tack in announcing the use of 
Incirlik for troop rotations, we were committed to not 
preempting them by acknowledging the rotations through this 
Turkish base first.  The timing of the Wall Street Journal 
article, sourced to U.S. officials, is likely to complicate 
efforts to work out with the Turks arrangements for other 
military operations and ooperation in the future.  End 
Comment. 
 
 
¶7.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN