This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 000569 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA 
STATE FOR IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION FEB 17-18: AL-HURRA SATELLITE 
CHANNEL, MEPI, IRAQ 
 
¶1.  "A New Satellite Channel" 
Dr. Ahmed Al-Rubei, former MP and liberal columnist wrote in 
independent Al-Qabas (2/17):  "The launch of Al-Hurra 
satellite channel elicited angry reactions and was labeled 
an American conspiracy by many Arab news media.  This 
reaction is nave and clear sign of an overwrought mindset. 
In an age where technology reigns, and where Arab satellite 
channels are in regress, Al-Hurra can succeed only if it 
does not become the mouthpiece of American foreign policy. 
Only if Al-Hurra conducts a healthy and impartial dialogue 
where all opinions are presented, then perhaps it can open 
the door for objective analysis and fair competition.  Self- 
Confident nations must look on such an event as an addition 
of a new color to the spectrum of the colors of freedom." 
 
¶2.  "Rich and Poor" 
Fouad Al-Hashem wrote in independent Al-Watan (2/17): "I 
predict within one year, the newly launched Al-Hurra 
satellite channel, will best seventy five percent of all 
current Arab satellite channels.  The finest endorsement for 
the new channel was articulated when a female employee said 
she worked at numerous media outlets, but now working at Al- 
Hurra she was free of the censor." 
 
¶3.  "Do Not Underestimate the Power of Media" 
Sami Abdul Latif Al-Nisif wrote in independent Al-Anba 
(2/18):  "In the view of many Arabs, the launch of the new 
satellite channel Al-Hurra is the first step in correcting 
decades of accumulated grievances created by America the 
"Great Satan".  Not only can Al-Hurra pull the rug out from 
under the rest of the Arab satellite channels, but also, it 
can correct many misconceptions on American foreign policy 
toward the region and perhaps end the tension." 
 
¶4.  "A reading . Into an International Plan" 
Dr. Mohammed Al-Rumaih wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-A'am 
(2/17):  "On several occasions, president Bush and foreign 
secretary Powell spoke of MEPI and both hoped Western states 
 
SIPDIS 
would adopt MEPI as a future working plan toward the Middle 
East.   The philosophy behind this project lies in that 
instability in the Middle East is threatening the interests 
of countries such as the United States, and this instability 
is due to a failure in the development in the Arab world. 
Most significantly, many Western decision makers believe 
that Arab leaders are using the unresolved Palestinian 
problem as a pretext to delay reforms.  MEPI plan in general 
focuses on education, and many of its elements are 
beneficial and welcome.  It is what MEPI fails to mention 
that is much more significant." 
 
¶5.  "Iraqis Electrocuted" 
Faisal Al-Zamil wrote in independent Al-Anba (2/18):  "It 
seems Paul Bremer and the Coalition Authority are releasing 
persons linked to the former Iraqi regime, the same people 
who tormented the Iraqi people.  Many Iraqis were right to 
be suspicious of America's motives.  How can we comprehend 
the reason behind the release of Saadoun Hamadi and Mohammed 
Al-Sahaf, who committed crimes against Iraqis and led them 
into pointless wars, while hundreds of Guantanamo detainees 
continue to be incarcerated only on reason of suspicion? 
This silly charade of releasing war criminals, and 
classifying their leader [Saddam Hussein] a Prisoner of War 
is a serious turning point which even the families of 
American soldiers are now questioning." 
 
Urbancic