This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 000863 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR, WHA/USOAS, IO/UNP, AND DRL 
STATE PASS AID/LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KWMN DR MX
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: UN'S INSTRAW GETS NEW DIRECTOR 
 
 
¶1.  Dr. Carmen Moreno, the recently arrived new director of 
the UN International Research and Training Institute for the 
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), briefed local diplomats on 
her plan to revitalize the UN entity, at a breakfast hosted 
by the Spanish ambassador February 3.  Moreno, former Mexican 
ambassador to the OAS and Guatemala, was named as part of a 
UNGA mandate to resuscitate INSTRAW, which had atrophied as 
its funding dried up in recent years.  At the moment, aside 
from the director, INSTRAW has a staff of five at its Santo 
Domingo headquarters, of whom only one is a professional 
researcher.  Moreno anticipated visits by UN officials from 
New York to help her craft a new strategy for the institute. 
 
¶2. Moreno said she had developed her proposals in 
consultations at UN and OAS headquarters, with key permreps, 
and with research and academic institutions.  She identified 
as priorities: 
 
-- Addressing problems of migration of women, in particular 
criminally organized trafficking in persons; 
 
-- Local/municipal training of women for development, using 
computer technology to provide access to information and the 
wider world; 
 
-- Advancing dialogue with men on their responsibilities with 
regard to women's health and problems such as domestic 
violence; 
 
-- Reducing the isolation of vulnerable groups such as young 
women and female senior citizens; 
 
-- Increasing knowledge of women's important roles in 
agriculture and managing natural resources such as water 
supplies and forests; and 
 
-- Promoting women as entrepreneurs running micro-enterprises. 
 
¶3. We understand that Spain is contributing US $200,000 to 
the revitalization of INSTRAW.  The UNGA has authorized US 
$500,000 from the UN's regular budget to finance the 
institute's core activities, half of which is contingent on 
voluntary contributions from UN members.  At the breakfast, 
Moreno and the Spanish ambassador appealed for donor nations 
to consider such contributions. 
 
¶4. Poloff suggested to Moreno that she contact other U.S. 
Embassy staff involved in gender aspects of development and 
human rights. 
 
¶5. Dr. Carmen Moreno's e-mail is cmoreno@un-instraw.org . 
Website is www.un-instraw.org . 
HERTELL