This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 000407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL PTER KPAL IS IZ SY IR SA JO MEPP
SUBJECT: FM MUASHER SAYS ISRAELI WALL IS KILLING PROSPECTS 
FOR A TWO-STATE SOLUTION TO STAFFDEL NORDQUIST 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward Gnehm for reason 1.5d 
 
------- 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) FM Muasher told a Senate staff delegation on January 
15 that the Israeli separation barrier - "the wall" - is 
killing prospects for a two-state solution, and that he 
expects negative movement in the peace process this year.  He 
fears a future partitioning of Iraq if any arrangement is 
made to weaken the central government and is concerned about 
Iran's influence in the south.  On Saudi Arabia, he said that 
if there is a change in regimes it "will be to the Bin 
Ladens".  On Syria, he characterized President Bashar Al Asad 
and FM Farouk Sharaa's views on the Iraqi Governing Council's 
(IGC) progress as completely different.  End Summary. 
 
---------------- 
Palestine-Israel 
---------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Muasher described the PNA as "in total paralysis" and 
expects that there will be reversals in the peace process 
this year.  He described the wall's current location as a 
"killer to future prospects for a two-state solution," and he 
believes that its construction is not temporary.  He stressed 
Jordan's strategic interests - to protect Jordan from a 
population transfer - arguing that construction of the wall 
led to inevitable consequences that would undermine Jordan's 
security. 
 
-------- 
Iraq 
-------- 
 
¶3. (C) He expressed deep concern that any arrangement made in 
Iraq to weaken the central government would lead to a 
partitioning into two or three areas, seriously endangering 
stability.  He said that the Sunnis feel marginalized and 
that membership in the IGC should be more representative of 
the population.  He is worried over Iran's influence in the 
south and described the planned withdrawal of U.S. forces in 
July as a "disaster". 
 
---------------------- 
Saudi Arabia and Syria 
---------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Muasher expressed Jordan's support for Crown Price 
Abdullah but said he fears extremism and instability in the 
Kingdom.  He said pointedly that if there is a change in 
regimes, "it will be to the Bin Ladens", not to liberal 
democrats.  On Syria, he observed that President Bashar Al 
Asad and FM Faruk Shara seemed not to share the same view on 
foreign policy.  Citing a recent trip to Damascus, Muasher 
described Shara's opinion of the IGC's progress as extremely 
negative but said that Asad took the opposite view. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified website at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM