This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR DAS BRADTKE, EUR/RPM, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/12/2014 
TAGS: MARR PREL TU
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL SUMMIT: TURKEY SUPPORTIVE OF GME BUT 
WANTS SUPPORT FOR A NATO-EU COMMON VISION 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, reasons 1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) Pol-Mil Counselor and polmiloff met with MFA DDG for 
NATO Affairs Fatih Ceylan to sound out MFA's thinking about 
the Greater Middle East (GME) initiative at the Istanbul 
Summit after the late January visit to Washington of 
Ambassadors Sensoy and Morali.  Ceylan said that Ambassadors 
Sensoy and Morali had extensive discussions during their 
recent visit to Washington on the GME, and the GOT was 
actively "working on it."  Ceylan said that the GOT 
understood its importance of the GME, and MFA was working out 
how to best support it.  The NATO Department at MFA was 
working on the security pillar of the initiative, whereas 
other departments were working on political, economic and 
societal pillars.  Ceylan noted with approval that the US 
hoped to implement the initiative using existing mechanisms 
within NATO, particularly the Mediterranean Dialogue and the 
Partnership for Peace.  He said the UK DCM had recently 
raised similar points with him.  PM Erdogan had spoken 
several times in recent statements of his support for 
"developing the Middle East."  Ceylan concluded that there 
was a political willingness to "share this initiative, as 
stated by the Prime Minister." 
 
 
2.In a parallel conversation, DG Morali told DCM that the GOT 
was anxious to assist with our NATO GME concept.  They were 
pleased that the concept distributed at NATO drew on existing 
mechanisms and did not overreach in trying to push NATO 
projects beyond security.  Morali indicated that they remain 
concerned with the interconnection (in NATO) between the 
existing Mediterannean Dialogue and the new initiative.  He 
added that they look forward to continued engagement with the 
US on the GME as it unfolds in this Summer's three summits. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Ceylan said, however, that Turkey's proposal for a 
NATO-EU common strategic vision at the Summit had met a 
lukewarm response in Washington.  Ceylan reiterated reftel 
points that in recent statements there seemed to be much 
common ground between NATO and the EU on the subjects of 
preventive engagement, terrorism and transatlantic relations. 
 Turkey believed it was important to construct a common 
strategic vision based on these building blocks that would 
consolidate commonalties between NATO and the EU.  Ceylan 
gave PolMil Counselor a copy of the non-paper on the issue 
(para 4) that Morali provided to USG interlocutors in 
Washington, and suggested the two initiatives could dovetail, 
e.g. a statement that includes both a GME element and a 
common strategic vision between NATO and the EU.  Morali 
indicated that Turkey would like to see further progress on 
the NATO-EU vision at the summit.  He said the GOT believed 
that moving forward in implementing Berlin Plus in real 
circumstances (e.g. in Bosnia) created a circumstance where 
NATO and the EU should demonstrate a common vision.  He 
commented favorably on suggestions received from the UK that 
such a statement could fairly easily and usefully focus on a 
common vision against Terrorism. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: Getting Turkish support for a Greater Middle 
East initiative is pushing on an open door.  But the Turks 
still are looking for clarity of the broadest definition, 
including their role in the broad applications.  At the same 
time as a boost to their EU candidacy, they are seeking to 
define elements of a NATO-EU Common Strategic Vision. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Begin Text of Turkish Non-Paper: 
 
 
Non-Paper on NATO-EU Common Strategic Vision 
 
 
-- NATO-EU common understanding is that both military and 
non-military threats and risks of the 21st century are 
diverse in nature.  The international environment is equally 
more dynamic and less predictable. 
 
 
-- As interlocking institutions, NATO and the EU, by acting 
in synergy and making full use of Berlin Plus arrangements, 
can constitute a formidable force for peace, security and 
well being on a global scale. 
 
 
-- A shared threat assessment by both organizations should 
lead to common words and deeds.  NATO-EU Common Strategic 
Vision is the best means to this end. 
 
 
-- There is already a solid basis to build upon in this 
regard: December 2002, NATO-EU arrangements on the strategic 
partnership of the two organizations.  These arrangements 
have been further defined and solidified in the exchange of 
letters between the two Secretary Generals on 17 March 2003, 
establishing the "Compilation of the Results of the work on 
NATO-EU Relations."  The documents listed in this compilation 
provide the necessary mechanisms for NATO support for EU-led 
operations where the Alliance as a whole is not engaged. 
 
 
-- This solid basis is further buttressed by the shared 
values and common interests of the transatlantic partners. 
The transatlantic partnership constitutes an irreplaceable 
asset in which NATO remains the foundation of collective 
defense. 
 
 
-- The European Security Strategy is a welcome and 
constructive step in contributing to a NATO-EU Common 
Strategic Vision. 
 
 
-- A stronger European Security and Defense Policy/Union is a 
means of having a stronger NATO-EU Strategic Partnership. 
 
 
-- Our joint work should be guided by the principles of 
openness, transparency and inclusiveness. 
 
 
-- Coherence, partnership, cooperation and effective mutual 
consultations are the tools at our disposal for the common 
endeavor. 
 
 
-- Our commitment to working together as Allies and Partners 
continues to be the framework in which we aim to build our 
efforts for peace and stability.  A NATO-EU framework is the 
most suitable multilateral tool to achieve this mission. 
 
 
-- Terrorism and the proliferation of WMD and their means of 
delivery constitute the greatest potential threats to our 
security.  Both organizations have already charted a common 
course for the fight against these scourges. 
 
 
-- Further development of NATO-EU cooperation in the area of 
security and stability in the Mediterranean will also provide 
synergies in our fight against terrorism. 
 
 
-- We categorically reject and condemn terrorism in all its 
forms.  It has complex causes, therefore needs a 
comprehensive and multifaceted response.  Our concerted 
approach would provide a great added value to our common 
fight against terrorism. 
 
 
-- We are committed to the goal of preventing the 
proliferation of WMD and their means of delivery.  Achieving 
greater adherence to multilateral treaty regimes on 
disarmament, arms control, and non-proliferation, as well as 
strengthening them and their verification provision, remain 
to be our main tools in the is effort.  We are determined to 
take joint NATO-EU work on non-proliferation further ahead. 
 
 
-- Regional instability continues to be a threat to our 
security. Our concerted approach in the Balkans has already 
yielded tangible results.  Following our successful joint 
action within the framework of Operation Concordia in 
Macedonia, a new window of opportunity has emerged for joint 
action in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  NATO has decided to 
terminate SFOR in Bosnia-Herzegovina on .....*.  Following 
the Alliance's decision, Operation X*, which the EU has 
decided to launch on ....*, by making use of NATO assets and 
capabilities through the Berlin Plus arrangements, is further 
proof of our determination to jointly bring peace and 
stability to the Balkans.  NATO should continue to be engaged 
as ever in the security and stability of Bosnia-Herzegovina 
and in the Balkans as a whole. 
 
 
-- Both NATO and the EU continue to further their efforts 
through a common approach towards providing peace and 
stability in Afghanistan by making best use of their 
comparative advantages.  Further cooperation on the territory 
among major organizations, including NATO, the EU and the 
United Nations, will be key in achieving the final aim of 
consolidating peace and stability in Afghanistan. 
 
 
-- NATO and the EU will continue to work together in the same 
spirit for peace and stability in other areas struck by 
conflict.  They will join their efforts in humanitarian and 
peace building missions. 
 
 
-- Both organizations confirm their willingness and readiness 
to work together in dealing with man-made or natural 
disasters. 
 
 
-- Developing effective military capabilities in a 
consistent, transparent and mutually reinforcing way is a 
priority for NATO-EU cooperation.  This cooperative effort 
will make available the required military means for effective 
action. 
 
 
-- NATO-EU cooperation in areas mentioned above could only 
benefit from more frequent NATO-EU joint crisis management 
exercises, to be followed by joint lessons learned analysis. 
CME/CMX 03 has proved to be a useful and effective instrument 
in planning for similar experiences. 
-- Bad governance, corruption, weak institutions, abuse of 
power and human rights continue to pose a threat to 
international security.  Organized crime is another threat 
undermining international security that needs to be urgently 
addressed.  NATO and the EU are determined to work together 
against such diffuse threats, with special emphasis on the 
Mediterranean, the Balkans, Central Asia and the Caucasus. 
 
 
-- Conflict prevention proves to be more important than ever. 
 It is never too early to initiate cooperative and united 
efforts for conflict prevention.  Regional organisations 
(Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organisation, Organisation of 
the Islamic Conference, Economic Cooperation Organisation) 
are useful partners in this effort.  NATO and the EU can each 
provide their accumulated institutional expertise to this end 
in a concerted way.  Furthermore, OSCE and the Council of 
Europe are close partners in this common endeavor. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
-- We will be reporting on the implementation of this joint 
strategic vision to our next summit on.... 
 
 
-- Facing the challenges, threat and risks of the 21st 
century together, NATO and the EU are united in their 
strategic partnership for the maintenance of peace and 
stability in the world. 
 
 
* EU is expecting to launch an EU-led operation in B-H 
following the termination of SFOR.  This new EU-led operation 
(nicknamed Operation X for the moment) will also have a 
military component making use of NATO assets and 
capabilities.  A separate declaration would most probably be 
made for this purpose during the Summit. 
 
 
End text of non-paper. 
EDELMAN