This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MAPUTO 000204 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR S/CT, INL/AAE, AF/S, AF/RSA 
ADDIS FOR GALINDO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC KCRM SENV PREL MZ
SUBJECT: CTAG MEETING IN MAPUTO 
 
REF: STATE 14279 
 
¶1. Summary: On February 5, DCM hosted our first CTAG 
meeting (per reftel request) with counterparts from Spain, 
Portugal, Russia, France, Italy, Switzerland, UK, Germany, 
European Commission, and Ireland (representing EU troika). 
Participants concurred that improved maritime security for 
Mozambique's vulnerable coastline was a top priority and 
agreed to coordinate efforts of the USG, France, Portugal, 
and the EC to provide coastal patrol capacity. Other areas 
of mutual concern discussed include financial oversight, 
trafficking of drugs and people, money laundering, and 
corruption. End summary. 
 
¶2. USG assistance: The GRM has acceded to all twelve UN 
Counter-Terrorism conventions. The USG has offered to 
assist the Mozambican MFA in preparations for hosting a 2004 
National Counter-Terrorism Conference in Maputo on 
implementation of UN Counter-Terrorism conventions. Post 
sent Ministry of Finance and Central Bank of Mozambique 
officials to USG training provided at ILEA Botswana. Post 
provides updated terrorist assets control lists to 
appropriate GRM officials. 
 
¶3. USG assistance (continued): Post provided computer 
equipment to airport authorities for lookout database. 
Officials from Customs, Police, Ministry of interior, 
Immigration, and Finance Ministry attended Counter-terrorism 
seminar in Gaborone, Botswana. USG provided FBI training 
for prosecutors at Mozambique's Judicial Training Center 
including anti-money laundering components. OPDAT 
intermittent advisor to Mozambican Police Academy has spent 
six months in Maputo for curriculum development and 
specialized course coordination (including visits by ten USG- 
funded trainers). DOD conducted Maputo airport survey. USG 
provided counter-terrorism training to SISE (GRM security 
service). DOD Maritime Officers Course provided to 
Mozambican Navy and international law course for MFA, MOD, 
Interior and Justice Ministries, both with goal of 
establishing maritime patrol capacity (provision of EDA 
patrol craft and IMET crew training). 
 
¶4. USG (continued): Post will seek equipment requested by 
Mozambican customs for container inspection in ports of 
Maputo, Beira, and Nacala. Post has requested DHS fraud 
prevention training for immigration and airline officials in 
Maputo and Ressano Garcia (land border post with South 
Africa). 
 
¶5. None of the CTAG participants indicated direct programs; 
however, nearly all indicated programs to build government 
capacity in areas directly related to CT capabilities. 
¶6. United Kingdom: The British High Commission has 
provided training in bank auditing and financial systems and 
currently is conducting a large project with Mozambican 
Customs, implemented by Crown Agents. Technical support is 
scheduled to last to 2005. While British concerns 
regarding counter-terrorism focus on Kenya, Tanzania, and 
South Africa, the BHC has made the case to London that 
Mozambique is an important part of the jigsaw. 
 
¶7. France: The French DCM stated that they see the coast 
as the key and are addressing this specific vulnerability. 
They have argued to Paris for increasing naval capacity hpe 
to provide one or two small patrol boats to the GRM in 2004, 
the target date of 2003 not having been met. They plan 
future joint naval exercises and had two GRM Navy personnel 
on their frigate during a January 2004 port visit to Maputo. 
In 2001, France also provided support to the Mozambican 
police lab. 
 
¶8. European Commission: The EC provided some customs 
training to the GRM, but has focused on assisting GRM public 
sector reform, judicial reform, and increased budget 
accountability. They provide direct financial support to 
the Ministry of fisheries for monitoring the coastline 
(including funding surveillance flight hours). Approximately 
two million euros are provided annually for assistance 
related to fisheries. Included in the program is technical 
support for development of a maritime code. 
 
¶9. Portugal: Portugal is the driving force behind CPLP 
joint military exercises, with an emphasis in training for 
PKOs and staff command and control. They provide support to 
the GRM Military Academy in Nampula and are also assisting 
with development of the maritime code. Portuguese law 
instructors are rotated at the Police Academy to provide a 
constant presence of two during the academic year. 
 
¶10. Italy: Italy has supported the police anti-drug unit 
with vehicles, equipment, and training, and has funded a 
UNODC regional program to combat transnational drug 
trafficking. Funding for both projects ended in 2003. 
 
¶11. Russia: Stressed the need to focus on the police, 
immigration, and borders. Their embassy security officer 
called Mozambique a paradise for terrorists and stated that 
SISE is not sufficiently organized to address the problem. 
No watchlist database exists and Interior and Foreign 
ministries have no plan to create one. Russia has invited 
the Interior minister to Moscow, but he keeps postponing the 
trip (Note: Minister Manhenje is fluent in Russian and 
trained as a MIG pilot. End Note.) Mozambican have received 
some training from Spetznaz. Russia's doors are open for 
further cooperation with Interior, MFA, and SISE, but it 
seems that they are frustrated with the GRM's lukewarm 
interest. 
 
¶12. Comment: The clear message from meeting was the need to 
coordinate our efforts to get the GRM to adopt a model 
maritime code and prepare themselves to utilize coastal 
patrol boats. All participants agreed that weak land 
borders, ineffective and corrupt police and judicial 
officials, absent coastal patrol capacity, and poor 
coordination between GRM entities all contribute to an 
environment conducive to organized crime and terrorists. 
Post and many other donors (including the Nordics, who were 
not invited to the meeting) are focused on corruption and 
transparency issues, especially considering their linkage to 
transnational crime, alien smuggling, money laundering, and 
possible terrorist financing. The EC and others also 
express concern regarding weak security in ports and along 
the coast contributing to illegal fishing and export of 
precious hardwood timbers, both with severe environmental 
repercussions. 
LA LIME