This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO EB/CBA:DWINSTEAD/LINDA STEWART; COMMERCE FOR 
ARI BENAISSA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP BTIO CE MV ETRD ABUD ECONOMICS
SUBJECT: COLOMBO FY2003 BFIF CLOSEOUT 
 
REF: 03 STATE 346405 
 
¶1. Post greatly appreciates the support it receives from 
the BFIF program and staff.  It allows the Commercial 
Section to promote US exports in a region where there is 
stiff competition from Asian neighbors, and a lack of 
knowledge about tapping the US market.  Both Sri Lanka 
and the Maldives are heavily reliant on imports, and 
offer significant opportunities for US firms.  BFIF 
funds are critical to keeping US suppliers in the minds 
of importers in both countries.  Increased US Exports 
was a MPP Goal in 2003, and all three projects directly 
supported that goal. 
 
¶2. Post is pleased to inform BFIF of the completion of 
all activities approved under FY2003 funding. 
 
¶3. Following is the expenditure summary for BFIF 
projects, 2003: 
 
Project 1: 
American Fair 2003: Maldives Trade and Catalog Show 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Conference hall charges (3 days) $856.00 
Promotional expenses $1,901 
Photo Paper for Printing Posters $438.00 
Products acquisition charges $54.00 
Shipment & handling charges (Colombo/Male')$400.00 
Transport/handling/clearing/re-shipment 
charges(Male'/Colombo) $727.00 
Courier Charges $737.00 
Booth contractor charges $3,765.00 
Computer and printer rental $155.00 
Chamber of Commerce Administrative Costs: $200.00 
Embassy officials' travel & per diem: $1,582.00 
Subtotal: $10,815 
 
Project 2: 
Printing of Commercial Brochures 
-------------------------------- 
1,500 brochures describing Commercial services 
Design and Printing: $300.00 
 
Project 3: 
Production of Business Card CDs 
------------------------------- 
600 Business Card CDs describing Commercial services 
Design, software and production: $3,200.00 
 
¶4. Following are the programmatic reports for BFIF 
projects, 2003: 
 
Project 1: American Fair 2003 
----------------------------- 
The fifth annual US trade and catalog event in the 
Maldives from September 17-19, 2003, was the most 
successful to date.  Over 350 people (approximately 3% 
of the nation's labor force) visited the exhibition. 
 
For the second time, Post expanded its presentation of 
the Asian Multi-Sector Catalog Show to include company 
representation.  Five US companies (Energizer, 
RedHat/Linux, Commercial Lynks, UniSolar and Southwest 
Windpower) and the New Delhi FAS Office participated by 
taking booths, sending representatives and displaying 
products.  The recently completed AID-funded wind and 
solar resources map in the Maldives was also displayed 
supporting the two alternative energy companies that 
participated. 
 
The ability to sponsor the Multi-product Catalog Show 
has allowed the US to be the only nation that holds an 
annual trade event in the Maldives.  This year, over 80 
US companies in many industry sectors sent product 
catalogs/brochures for display.  Some US companies 
continue their participation at this event over 
successive years.  The catalog show generated much 
interest as visitors sat for long periods and studied 
the literature. 
 
The show attracted significant interest of the Maldivian 
private sector.  Senior or middle level managers, and 
some owners of companies involved in trading, as well as 
resort management, visited.  As expected, the companies 
promoting wind power and solar technology attracted the 
most interest, due to the focus on alternative power 
generation demands in the Maldives.  The promotional 
strategy for the fair included direct mailers, TV 
advertising, flyers inserted in major newspapers and 
posters. The inauguration ceremony was recorded and 
broadcast on national television in the Maldives. 
 
Project 2: 
Printing of Commercial Brochures 
-------------------------------- 
The peace process has allowed strong economic recovery 
in Sri Lanka, offering new opportunities for US firms. 
The Commercial Section had no literature describing the 
services available to local and US businesses.  Though 
there's been a noticeable increase in interest and 
visits by US firms, frequently, they are unaware of 
assistance the Section can offer.  Also, there is a lack 
of awareness locally about how to do business with the 
US. 
The brochure will be a useful tool to address this 
information gap and to promote use of the Library and 
Commercial Services.  The brochure will be mailed to the 
Chambers of Commerce, leading private conglomerates and 
firms, development banks and other relevant lending 
institutions.  The brochure will also be sent to top 
hotels in Colombo to be displayed in business centers, 
and to neighboring FCS offices. 
 
Project 3: 
Production of Business Card CDs 
------------------------------- 
The CD offers comprehensive economic and commercial data 
about Sri Lanka and the Maldives with relevant web links 
to important sites.  The CD will be available to US 
businesses and potential investors exploring 
opportunities with Sri Lankan and Maldivian companies. 
This CD contains much of the data necessary for US 
businesses to make informed decisions on entering the 
Sri Lankan and Maldivian markets.  It also will help Sri 
Lankan companies find US suppliers, trade and shipping 
regulations, phytosanitory requirements and other 
relevant information. 
 
¶5. Post looks forward to continued participation in the 
valuable BFIF program. 
LUNSTEAD