This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 000389 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ECON KDEM JO
SUBJECT: OPPOSITION ATTACKS GOJ MINISTERS, POLICIES AS NEW 
POLITICAL SPACE OPENS:  HOW LONG CAN IT LAST? 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 304 
 
     ¶B. AMMAN 381 
     ¶C. 03 AMMAN 8605 
     ¶D. AMMAN 350 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b) (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  Recent royal and government statements encouraging 
greater political openness have led to new and more open 
public and private debate on important public policy issues, 
including school curriculum reform, contemplated price 
increases, and government spending on social programs.  The 
debate has also produced allegations of corruption against 
ministers and the former PM, and these allegations have begun 
to touch on the Palace in private conversations.  While most 
GOJ officials have expressed only irritation with these 
developments up to now, the increasing volume of public 
criticism and its increasing inferences to the King could 
prompt some in the GOJ to consider constricting the newly 
opened political space.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
JORDAN BEGINS A "SILLY SEASON?" 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Statements by King Abdullah, PM Faisal al-Fayez, and 
other GOJ ministers in the new, reform-minded cabinet 
encouraging greater political openness and dialogue on 
national issues have met with some success.  Since the 
beginning of the regular session of Parliament on December 1, 
there has been lively (and often irresponsible) public and 
press discussion of public policy issues, including 
curriculum reform (ref a), revision of the military pension 
law, and a call from a group of MPs to abrogate Jordan's 
treaty with Israel (ref b).  Private conversations with MPs 
and senators indicate that other government programs and 
reforms may come under similar scrutiny in the coming months, 
especially proposed government price hikes on petroleum 
products and pharmaceuticals, privatization of large state 
industries, and priorities for social spending and the Social 
and Economic Transformation Program (SETP).  Most Embassy 
contacts believe that the swift proliferation of topics of 
debate (particularly on domestic and governance issues) and 
the sharp increase in frequency and volume of criticism of 
government programs is indicative of a new, larger political 
space. 
 
------------------------------------- 
RIFE WITH (ALLEGATIONS OF) CORRUPTION 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S)  While this more vigorous debate and the increased 
political space is a positive development, it has definite 
down sides for the GOJ.  For example, there have been direct 
and public charges of corruption against Planning Minister 
Bassam Awadallah and former PM Ali Abul Ragheb (refs c and 
d).  MP Abdullah Akaileh (East Banker, Tafileh, former member 
of the Islamic Action Front), during the December 2003 debate 
on confidence in the new government, openly accused Awadallah 
of corruption.  When pressed by PolCouns January 13 on the 
specifics of his allegations, Akaileh said he believes 
Awadallah has paid off journalists to write positive stories 
about him, and expressed doubts about the propriety of 
spending in Awadallah's SETP, claiming that much of the money 
was being used for "handouts" rather than social development. 
 He claimed that he would lead a parliamentary request for 
full disclosure of all money spent to date on the program. 
 
¶4.  (S)  Akaileh also attacked Awadallah's personality, 
describing him as arrogant, fast-talking, and a person "with 
no idea what goes on in a Jordanian village" (a veiled 
reference to Awadallah's Palestinian origin and Western 
orientation.)  Akaileh also accused Communications and 
Information Technology Minister Fawwaz Zoubi of nepotism 
(promoting his sister in law to a senior rank in the 
ministry).  Other MPs also leveled allegations of corruption 
against immediate past PM Ali Abul Ragheb, and threatened to 
open a parliamentary inquiry.  Abul Ragheb was forced to call 
on the Parliament speaker and state publicly that he had no 
objection to such an inquiry, after an ill-advised TV 
interview in which he admitted to what amounted to minor 
offenses just as he denied allegations of major ones. 
 
¶5.  (S)  In private, several MPs and NGO activists have begun 
to criticize the King directly.  One East Bank tribal MP told 
PolCouns recently that the King had chosen a fractious 
government that would never win the confidence of average 
Jordanians, and that he should correct this mistake by 
appointing a new government "with the proper political base" 
(i.e. political and tribal figures without a technocratic 
background).  More disturbing for the Palace are growing 
private expressions of concern over the King's continued 
confidence in controversial figures like Awadallah against 
whom there have been (widely believed) allegations of 
corruption, and whispers of Palace involvement with less than 
reputable business deals. 
 
--------------------- 
HOW LONG CAN IT LAST? 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Most Jordanians have reacted to the wider bounds for 
public debate with cautious optimism.  One NGO head told PAO 
and PolCouns that he would initiate new democracy programs 
"to fill the new political space."  All the MPs and senators 
with whom we have spoken told us they felt more free to 
express criticism of the government in public, and several 
pledged to continue to press the envelope of permissible 
public expression.  (One added that she hoped the debate 
would remain polite and based on provable facts, not 
emotional outbursts). 
 
¶7.  (C)  Some remain skeptical.  MP Abdullah Akaileh 
described the recent expansion of freedom of expression in 
the context of a historical cycle of expansion and 
contraction of political space that began under King Hussein. 
 He expected the current tolerant government attitude to last 
no more than a year or two.  A former MP dismissed the new 
debate as transitory, and declared that she would refrain 
from pushing the envelope in public to avoid what she 
expected would be political retribution from the government 
in the future. 
 
¶8.  (S)  Many in the government are beginning to express 
irritation at the increased level (and personal nature) of 
the criticism.  Finance Minister Abu Hammour told the 
Ambassador that, when he had suggested in a cabinet meeting 
that the government welcome a parliamentary investigation of 
the government's financial practices, Awadallah reacted 
angrily and threatened to resign rather than face the 
indignity of such an inquiry. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9.  (S)  Although open criticism of the royal family remains 
taboo, the recent expansion of political space in Jordan 
seems to be real, and has resulted in public debate on public 
policies -- including education and pension reform -- that 
had received little such attention in the past.  It remains 
to be seen, however, whether the newly expanded boundaries of 
expression are here to stay. 
 
¶10.  (S)  The GOJ's less-than-forthcoming initial responses 
to the curriculum reform debate (ref a) and corruption 
allegations indicate that many in the government -- even 
among "reformers" -- are not used to dealing with public 
criticism or composing convincing arguments to support their 
policies.  Thus far, senior GOJ officials have expressed only 
irritation at the criticisms, but it is unclear whether they 
will be able to gird themselves for the long haul.  The 
danger in the quick expansion of public debate and the 
allegations against senior officials (and, by implication, 
the King) is that some may conclude that Jordan is not yet 
ready for "responsible democracy" and press to rein in public 
dialogue. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified website at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM