This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KDEM EAID JO
SUBJECT: RAVE REVIEWS FOR DRL-FUNDED HUMAN RIGHTS TRAINING 
 
REF: 03 STATE 273527 
 
¶1. As authorized in reftel, post arranged for human rights 
training, held February 7-10 in Amman for Jordanian 
government and human rights officials. Funded by DRL,s 
Economic Support Funds/Human Rights and Democracy Funds, 
American academics conducted four days of lectures, role 
plays, and question and answer sessions. Prof. David 
Weissbrodt of the University of Minnesota, and Prof. Cherif 
Bassiouni and Prof. David Guinn of DePaul University each 
taught, and all three participated in a final panel 
discussion. Taking part in the training were a total of 19 
employees from the MFA, National Center for Human Rights, 
Ministry of Interior, Public Security Directorate (police), 
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Justice, Peace Keeping 
Operations Center (an army officer), and the Institute of 
Diplomacy, which also hosted the training. 
 
¶2. Major themes covered by the lectures included the 
historical development of human rights; UN covenants and 
agreements; UN structures and procedures dealing with human 
rights; regional human rights bodies; international criminal 
law; religious freedom and economic, social and cultural 
rights; and fact-finding. One of the most popular sessions 
was a role-play involving human rights in Iran, as 
represented and discussed at the UN, with participants taking 
the part of Iranian delegates and UN and other national 
representatives. 
 
¶3. The training was held in three, two hour blocks each day, 
and the Institute of Diplomacy provided lunch and coffee 
breaks on site, as well as some administrative support. 
Though the level of the participants, English ability and 
familiarity with human rights issues and law varied 
dramatically, participation was actively encouraged by the 
instructors, and the majority asked questions and took part 
in the role play on human rights in Iran. The MFA had 
initiated the concept of the training and handled much of the 
planning, as well as invitations to the various organizations 
represented. It also provided consecutive interpretation when 
required. 
 
¶4. At the conclusion, participants provided valuable feedback 
via short evaluation forms. All had been selected by their 
organizations to attend the training, and a majority found 
that the course was what they had expected. The more critical 
comments came from those who felt the training was not 
advanced enough. Most participants wished that the current 
state of human rights in Jordan and the region had been 
covered. Almost all strongly urged that similar training be 
held again for others from their organizations. 
 
¶5. Comment: The training appears to have accomplished the 
objective of increasing the capacity of GOJ officials to 
promote internationally recognized standards of human rights. 
It did this not only by raising awareness, but also by 
providing officials with human rights portfolios with the 
opportunity to network. We were particularly pleased by the 
last-minute addition of participants from the police, 
military, and Interior and Justice Ministries. Post views the 
training as successful and hopes to repeat it. Both the MFA 
and the Institute of Diplomacy have requested that a similar 
course be held on an annual basis. Post recommends that the 
National Center for Human Rights (established 2003) be 
closely involved both to raise its stature and to capitalize 
on its pre-existing educational role. 
 
¶6. Fiscal data on the training will be forwarded separately. 
GNEHM