This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 000842 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV ELAB KDEM JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN: HUMAN RIGHTS STRATEGY IN 2003/4 
 
REF: 03 STATE 333935 
 
¶1. Post is providing the following report on actions taken by 
the USG in Jordan during 2003 and January 2004. This 
information is keyed to the requirements of reftel para 6. 
 
¶2. Begin text: 
 
A) Jordan has a history of restrictions on freedom of speech, 
press, assembly, and association, a weak judiciary, and 
security services that sometimes act with impunity, all of 
which contribute to human rights abuses. However, June 2003 
parliamentary and July 2003 municipal elections were 
generally considered free and fair. The King specifically 
charged the new government appointed in October with 
promoting political development and human rights; there was 
an increase in public debate on major policy issues by year's 
end. The U.S. human rights and democracy strategy for Jordan 
capitalizes on these developments and addresses a wide range 
of relevant issues including the rule of law and legal 
reforms, the growth of civil society and participation in 
democratic institutions, and improved education. The United 
States promotes human rights and democracy through direct 
dialogue with the Jordanian government at all levels, 
programs and training that foster particular elements of 
human rights, and by reporting on human rights, labor and 
religious freedom. The U.S. Agency for International 
Development's program ($250 million in 2003), though 
beneficial to all Jordanians, is especially structured to 
assist women and the sometimes marginalized poor and rural 
populations. 
 
B) not applicable 
 
C) During 2003, the Government formed the quasi-independent 
National Center for Human Rights, and the Embassy has 
arranged in-kind donations to its new library. The Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs also formed the Human Rights Directorate 
last year, with which the Embassy has developed a highly 
cooperative relationship. Over half of all professional 
military education provided in the U.S. to Jordanian 
personnel each year includes a human rights component. 
 
The Embassy has been directly involved in promoting the rule 
of law and legal reform. 12 Shari,a Law faculty members 
participated in an International Visitor (IV) Program on 
religious tolerance and 12 more are traveling this month. 
Several returned IV participants enrolled in the USG English 
Language Program, and plan to pursue higher studies in the 
U.S. During the year, 15 judges participated in 10-day 
mediation and case management workshops in the U.S. that 
included visits to different courts in California (see 
addendum). The Embassy continues to work closely with the 
Ministry of Justice to extend case management, mediation, 
and, potentially, criminal justice reforms. 
 
The Public Affairs section conducted three workshops for 
journalists on press freedom and responsibility and election 
coverage. Through PASA funding and MEPI support, the NGO Arab 
Civitas also introduced civic education activities in 21 
pilot government schools. 52 Jordanian public and private 
schools are now linked to American counterparts with whom 
they discuss human rights issues. In September, 20 students 
participated in a civic awareness and student leadership 
program in several cities throughout the U.S. (see addendum). 
 In December, the Embassy hosted a delegation from the 
American Council of Young Political Leaders to interact with 
civic-minded Jordanian youth and professionals. The Public 
Affairs section is currently funding and producing Arabic 
translations of the Foundations of Democracy book series. 
 
C and D) This year about 60 female candidates for the 
Jordanian parliamentary elections received individual 
counseling and training on campaign techniques and public 
relations through PA-sponsored workshops. The Embassy also 
funded a campaign phone center for one month prior to the 
elections. The six women elected have formed a support 
network with some of the unsuccessful female activists, and 
they continue to receive training through Mission-funded 
orientation programs on Parliamentary procedures and 
human-rights-related issues. 
 
E) The Embassy tracked and reported on religious freedom 
cases, and State Department officials in the Embassy and in 
Washington have discussed individual cases with the 
Government of Jordan at the highest levels. 
 
F) The U.S. maintains dialogue with key actors in the labor 
sector, including union leaders, International Labor 
Organization officials, industrial park managers, factory 
owners, and government representatives. As in the past, we 
placed special focus was on the Qualified Industrial Zones, 
which have special export privileges to the U.S., and where 
labor conditions have remained better than average. The 
Embassy also arranged for three union leaders to travel to 
the U.S. in January on a Citizen Exchange Program that 
familiarized them with the American labor movement and 
provided them with an opportunity to network. Embassy 
representatives discussed with government officials 
implementation of Jordan's international commitments to fight 
child labor and trafficking. 
 
¶3. Addendum (programs valued at over $100,000): 
 
Civic Awareness and Student Leadership Program ($184,186): 
Two-week visit to the U.S. in September 2003 by 20 students, 
organized by the Academy for Educational Development. Program 
introduced Jordanian youth to American culture and 
government, helping improve their understanding of the 
culture, society and values. Included visits to New York, 
Denver, Washington, DC and Rochester, NY in an effort to show 
a comprehensive and diversified picture of the U.S. 
 
Mediation and Case Management Workshop ($138,628): Twelve-day 
program in the U.S. (October 2003) for 15 Jordanian judges, 
organized by the Institute for the Study and Development of 
Legal Systems. Introduced participants to state and federal 
alternative dispute resolution coordination, mediation 
observation, and case management. Included visits to San 
Francisco and San Diego. 
 
GNEHM