This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

270557Z Feb 04C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
PLEASE ALSO PASS TOPEC 
 
E.O. 12958:   DECL: 02-27-14 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS PHUM KPAO CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Historic Jaffna library opens on limited basis 
 
Refs:  Colombo 302 (Notal) 
 
(U) Classified by James F. Entwistle, Deputy Chief of 
Mission.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  The library in the northern city of 
Jaffna has reopened, albeit on a limited basis, after 
much contention on this subject between the GSL and the 
Tigers.  The fact that the library -- one of the 
cultural centers of the war-torn Jaffna region -- has 
finally opened its doors is a positive sign, but it 
remains unclear if the Tigers will permit the library to 
reopen fully.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) On February 23, the Jaffna Library reopened on a 
limited basis.  Currently, only the reference section of 
the historic library, which was destroyed during 
fighting between the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam 
(LTTE) and GSL forces in 1981, will be open, allowing 
students to study for examinations.  The library, which 
before its destruction was considered one of the best in 
south Asia, has been reconstructed over the past several 
years by the GSL, with donations of books and materials 
coming from myriad sources, including international aid 
agencies, private donors, and diplomatic missions. 
(Note:  U.S.-donated microfiche containing archives of 
Tamil newspapers dating back to the 1800's, as well as a 
microfiche reader, is set to be contributed to the 
library, pending its full reopening.  Additionally, the 
Embassy hopes to install an "American Corner" consisting 
of computers, multimedia equipment, books, periodicals 
and other resources. 
 
¶3.  (C) Mission contacts say that moves to reopen the 
library have been pending for some time, due to the fact 
that educational resources are extremely limited in the 
war-torn Jaffna peninsula in the north, where most of the fighting 
during the country's civil war was concentrated.  Since 
the February 2002 ceasefire, schools have reopened in 
Jaffna, but materials and teachers are in extremely 
short supply.  The library was slated to reopen in 2002, 
but difficulties in funding and pressure from the 
Tigers, who see the library as an important symbolic and 
cultural center, prevented its reopening.  Subsequently, 
there have been several attempts by the GSL to reopen 
the library officially, which have been unsuccessful due 
to Tiger pressure and logistical difficulties.  On 
several Mission visits over the past year, emboffs have 
noted that the library has been extremely well- 
reconstructed, with many books both in Tamil and English 
on shelves, modern fire-suppression systems, well- 
maintained grounds and library staff undergoing computer 
training classes. 
 
¶4.  (C) Reaction to the library's partial reopening has 
been extremely positive, with contacts indicating that 
this is an important step in returning some limited 
semblance of normalcy to Jaffna.  Tamil National 
Alliance parliamentarian N. Raviraj told poloff on 
February 27 he was "extremely pleased" the library had 
reopened, albeit on a partial basis, as this meant 
students preparing for examinations could make use of 
the library's resources.  Father Bernard, who is a 
Catholic priest and human rights activist in Jaffna, as 
well a member of the library's advisory board, said he 
had been working to reopen the library for nearly a 
year, and was very happy that some services were now 
being offered. 
 
¶5.  (C) COMMENT:  The destruction of the Jaffna Library 
was seen as a strong symbolic event by the Tigers, as 
well as residents of Jaffna, who regard it as an 
important part of their cultural heritage.  The 
reopening of the library has attracted considerable 
attention in the local press, and while there has been 
no public reaction so far from the Tigers, this limited 
offering of services is almost certainly not without 
their approval.  It remains to be seen, however, when 
the library will become fully functional, and some 
contacts have floated the suggestion that the Tigers are 
allowing the library's "soft reopening" to garner 
political good will ahead of Sri Lanka's upcoming 
parliamentary elections.  As noted above, we have some 
very tangible assistance ready for delivery as soon as 
the interlocking logistical and political issues can be 
resolved.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶6.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD