This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001280 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM KPAL PHUM IS IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN MPS ADDRESS IRAQI OIL BRIBES & PUBLIC 
ASSEMBLY LAW; POSSIBLE CABINET RESHUFFLE IN THE WORKS? 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 00381 
 
     ¶B. 03 AMMAN 08605 
     ¶C. 03 AMMAN 06812 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for Reasons 1.5 (b), (d) 
 
 ------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) The Jordanian Parliament grappled in recent weeks 
with a variety of political topics.  In addition to debating 
the government's proposed budget and controversial price 
hikes (reported septel), the Parliament addressed allegations 
of Iraqi oil "bribes" under Saddam Hussein, approved a 
controversial provisional law regulating public gatherings, 
and condemned the Israeli security wall and excavations near 
the Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem.  Complaints by members of 
Parliament directed at certain government ministers have led 
to speculation of a possible Cabinet reshuffle.  End Summary. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
FORMER SPEAKER RAGES AGAINST IRAQI OIL "SCANDAL" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2.  (U) Fourteen Amman-based firms and Jordanian citizens, 
including former government officials and MPs, were included 
in a long list published in the Iraqi media in late January 
of individuals and organizations that supposedly received 
contracts for the sale of Iraqi oil, allegedly in exchange 
for political support of Saddam Hussein's regime.  During a 
Lower House session on January 28, former Speaker Saad Hayel 
Srour (East Banker, Northern Badia) called for the government 
to conduct an in-depth investigation of the allegations 
against those Jordanians on the list.  Private individuals 
and firms should be investigated for possible tax evasion, 
demanded Srour, while former government officials who used 
their posts for personal gains from the alleged Iraqi oil 
deal must be held fully accountable.  In response to Srour's 
statements, Deputy Prime Minister Mohammad Halaiqa told the 
Lower House that, "The issue is under follow-up, and we are 
seeking to verify if some people have acquired (Iraqi) 
graft." 
 
¶3.  (C) Despite Srour's demands for a full inquiry into the 
alleged oil scandal, this does not appear to be a 
"front-burner" issue for many MPs or for the government. 
Abdullah Al-Jazi (East Banker, Southern Badia) told PolOff 
that he and the other members of the conservative National 
Reformist bloc -- the largest grouping in the Lower House -- 
did not consider these bribery allegations as a priority 
item.  He remarked that there were many more important issues 
for the Lower House to focus on, especially since there was 
no hard evidence to back the bribery claims and the former 
officials in question were no longer in positions of real 
influence.  Other MPs outside the National Reformist bloc 
have expressed similar opinions. 
 
------------------------------------- 
WEIGHING SECURITY VS. PUBLIC FREEDOMS 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) On February 8, the Lower House of Parliament approved 
the Public Assembly Law passed by the government of former 
Prime Minister Ali Abul Ragheb in August 2001 while 
Parliament was dissolved.  Prior to the 2001 provisional law, 
public assemblies were technically covered by a 1953 law 
which, in theory, required organizers of public gatherings to 
only "notify" government authorities of the event.  The new 
legislation, however, requires organizers to obtain official 
permission from the provincial governor, whose decision 
whether to grant such permission cannot be appealed. 
 
¶5.  (U) In a two-hour debate during which over 30 MPs voiced 
their opinions, the provisional law encountered strong 
criticism from several legislators.  Azzam Huneidi (West 
Banker, Amman-1st District) of the Islamic Action Front, for 
example, charged that, "This is a very harmful law and will 
lower the ceiling of public freedoms."  Abdul Rahim Malhas 
(East Banker, Amman-3rd District) and Rawhi Shahaltough (East 
Banker, Amman-6th District) also decried the law as overly 
restrictive and stormed out of the Lower House chamber in 
protest prior to the vote when its approval appeared assured. 
 Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez defended the legislation 
saying the government was committed to freedoms highlighted 
in King Abdullah's Speech from the Throne (see ref c), but 
warned that "absolute freedom means chaos." 
 
¶6.  (U) After conclusion of debate, the law passed by an 
overwhelming majority.  Yet critics succeeded in pushing 
through two minor amendments.  First, the Lower House changed 
the wording to require assembly organizers to obtain 
permission 48 hours prior to the planned event, rather than 
72 hours.  Second, while the 2001 law directed governors to 
use "force" to disperse a gathering if it deviates from its 
approved purpose, the amendment authorizes governors to use 
"whatever measures they see fit to break up the assembly." 
¶7.  (C)  MP Malhas told PolOff February 10 that he had left 
the Lower House in protest because he wanted no part in the 
vote to approve this "major step away from public freedoms," 
which he said should have been called "the Law to Prevent 
Public Assembly."  According to Malhas, despite official 
statements promising greater freedom of expression, the 
government had apparently made a strategic choice to place 
security concerns above calls for political development. 
Malhas also expressed disappointment that the Islamic Action 
Front (IAF) -- after several statements criticizing the law 
-- had voted to approve it, albeit reluctantly.  He opined 
that contrary to popular perception, the IAF was "fully part 
of the system" and that the government and the Islamists used 
each other to their own advantage.  While the IAF sought to 
maximize its popularity on the street, it carefully chose its 
battles in the Parliament so as not to overly alienate the 
government or the Palace. 
 
--------------------------- 
MPs LASH OUT AGAINST ISRAEL 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) During Lower House discussions on "unscheduled 
topics," the Israeli security barrier in the West Bank came 
under heavy verbal fire from numerous MPs.  MP Younes Jamra 
(West Banker, Irbid-1st District) proposed a "national day of 
solidarity with the Palestinian people in their fight against 
the wall" to coincide with the start of oral arguments before 
the International Court of Justice on the barrier's legality. 
 On February 17, 85 MPs signed and presented a memorandum to 
the House Speaker condemning Israeli excavations around the 
Al Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem which allegedly caused the 
collapse of a structure near the mosque on February 15.  "We 
call on the government to intervene with Arab and friendly 
countries to stop (Israel) from invading the sanctity of Al 
Aqsa Mosque," stated the memorandum which was initiated by 
independent MP Khalil Attiyeh (West Banker, Amman-1st 
District). 
 
------------------ 
CABINET RESHUFFLE? 
------------------ 
 
¶9.  (C) As noted ref b, several ministers in the current 
Cabinet have been the targets of criticism both within and 
outside the Chamber of Deputies.  Hazem Al-Nasser, the 
Minister of Water & Irrigation, confided to the Ambassador 
recently that the government might have to contemplate a 
change in Cabinet ministers to assure the "survival" of Prime 
Minister Fayez and cement his relations with Parliament. 
While he did not make any firm predictions, Nasser named the 
following ministers as most vulnerable:  Bassem Awadallah 
(Minister of Planning & International Cooperation), Asma 
Khader (Government Spokesperson), Amal Al-Farhan (Minister of 
Municipal Affairs), and Said Darwazeh (Minister of Health). 
With the exception of Darwazeh, we have heard numerous barbs 
directed at these ministers from MPs and government insiders. 
 However, conversations with several MPs indicate that most 
do not expect -- or even want -- a Cabinet reshuffle at this 
point. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10.  (C) Both the government and Parliament are continuing to 
define their roles after the legislature's two-year hiatus. 
The issue of alleged Iraqi oil bribes demonstrates that even 
one vocal and determined MP can bring issues to public 
attention.  Given the general lack of interest in pursuing 
this particular matter, however, it is doubtful whether a 
serious investigation will be mounted.  The debate on the 
public assembly law likewise shows that emboldened MPs can 
denounce and modify legislation they find objectionable, 
although at the end of the day the government can count on a 
majority in the Lower House to approve most of its proposed 
laws.  The talk of contemplation of a Cabinet reshuffle 
indicates that some in the government are learning that they 
must listen to parliamentary opinion if the government wishes 
to push through its agenda while maintaining its political 
capital. 
 
Please visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ or through the 
Department of State's SIPRNET site. 
GNEHM