This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

111041Z Jan 04UNCLAS LAGOS 000054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS/AF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC SOCI NI
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON STRANDED WORLD AIRWAYS PASSENGERS 
 
REF: LAGOS 000031 
 
¶1.  On Thursday, January 8, 2004, approximately fifty 
stranded World Airways passengers appeared at the Consulate 
demanding assistance in returning to the U.S.  Some of the 
passengers claim they have been stranded since December 31 
and have been staying overnight at the airport while 
awaiting word from World Airways as to when they can return. 
 
¶2.  In an effort to be responsive and to calm the 
passengers, ACS Officer arranged a meeting with the stranded 
passengers in which the Consul General attended.  The Consul 
General advised the passengers that we were concerned about 
their situation and attempting to find alternatives for 
their travel.  However, their only financial recourse may be 
a legal one. 
 
¶3.  Passengers received a briefing from the ACS officer as 
to the repatriation process and alternatives such as 
securing flights via another carrier as well as obtaining 
money from family and friends to assist them financially. 
 
¶4.   The passengers stated their appreciation at having the 
Consul General speak with them.  Further, they stated it was 
the first time during this entire ordeal that they felt 
anyone cared about their situation. 
 
¶5.   Over the past two days, we have collected eleven 
applications for a loan.  Of those, we have determined that 
four are truly in need of repatriation.  We have also 
received additional passengers that are asking for letters 
for their employers or schools.  We have learned that World 
Airways tickets were sold through Friday, January 9, 2004. 
The airline stopped flying on December 31. 
 
¶6.   ACS Officer believes we will continue to see stranded 
passengers who become increasingly destitute as time passes. 
As they come in, we will process them all as individual 
repatriation cases. 
 
HINSON-JONES