This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MAPUTO 000197 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR,S/ES-O,AF/S AND AF/RSA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPDC PREL SL IV LI MZ ECOWAS
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM PRESIDENT CHISSANO 
 
On February 12, post received the following letter 
from the Office of the Presidency for President Bush. 
We will forward the hard copy to AF/S via pouch. 
Text of President Chissano's letter: 
Dear Mr. President, 
I wish to thank you for your assistance to ECOWAS and 
Africa in general in the operations for the 
restoration of peace in Liberia. I also wish, on 
behalf of Africa, to thank your Government and the 
people of the United States of America. Without your 
support, the suffering of the Liberian people would 
have lasted longer. 
West African soldiers and policemen have contributed 
immensely to the maintenance of peace and security in 
that sub-region and are right now committed to the 
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement in 
Cote d'Ivoire. 
The UN Secretary General recently issued a report 
that, among other things, recommended the UN Security 
Council approval for additional troops to boost the 
current ECOWAS forces in Cote d'Ivoire up to a total 
number of 6,240. 
I kindly request your personal support to this 
proposal in order to help the UN Secretary General 
Report go through the UN Security Council. The 
conflict in Cote d'Ivoire, as you know, is likely to 
have a spill over effect to neighbouring Liberia and 
Sierra Leone. The bloodletting in Liberia has been 
controlled, and all the parties are presently going 
through the process of disarmament, demobilization and 
reinsertion. No efforts, therefore, shall be spared 
to ensure that total peace is restored in Cote 
d'Ivoire. Otherwise, Liberia could be exposed to 
possible resumption of hostilities among the warring 
parties, who could easily move across the permeable 
borders at will. 
Please help Africa to elicit support from the 
leadership of the US Congress for this very important 
regional and sub-regional peace initiative. 
Please accept, Mr. President, the assurances of my 
highest consideration and esteem. 
Joaquim Alberto Chissano 
President of the Republic of Mozambique 
And Chairman of the African Union 
La Lime