This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 DJIBOUTI 000123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
AF/EX FOR D. YAMAMOTO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2014 
TAGS: PREL PTER PINR DJ
SUBJECT: DJIBOUTI: GOVERNMENT ANXIOUS OVER ELEVATED PROFILE 
 
REF: DJIBOUTI 110 
 
Classified By: POLOFF C. BEAMER FOR REASONS 1.5 (A,B,C,D) 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (S/NF)  Amidst growing Djiboutian Government stir related 
to recent explosions (Ref. A) and claims by Puntland 
strongman Abdullahi Yusuf of Djibouti arming Somaliland 
against him in the Sool region, Post SAO Major Patrick 
Anderson received a browbeating on January 27 from 
Abdourahman Boreh, perhaps the individual closest to 
Djiboutian President Ismail Omar Guelleh.  Boreh expressed a 
growing frustration from the Djiboutian side.  Boreh believes 
that despite their continued and ongoing support of the U.S. 
on several counter terrorism fronts Djibouti has not gained 
the concrete means to properly protect its own interests.  He 
made specific mention of the 25 million dollars in FMF 
security assistance that Djibouti has yet to see complaining 
that in the meantime, "If we take one hit at the Port we are 
finished."  Boreh was accompanied by Colonel Abdou, head of 
the President's Republican Guard, and Mohamed Ali Hassan, 
designated American military handler at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs.  The meeting reinforces Post's perception 
that the Djiboutians feel recent events have elevated their 
profile vis a vis transnational terrorism to unprecedented 
levels, while making evident their inability to react 
effectively. 
 
THE MESSAGE 
----------- 
 
¶2. (S/NF)  The fundamental complaint is not a new one for 
those familiar with the recent history of an increased U.S. 
footprint in Djibouti.  High expectations have been created 
by the increased DOD and other U.S. Agency presence here and 
Djibouti's business elite want to see the goods delivered. 
They are particularly anxious about the security of their 
port and airport, the pillars upon which the service economy 
is built.  Team after team of evaluators from numerous U.S. 
agencies have passed through both facilities and still the 
Djiboutians do not have the naval capacity to protect their 
current port let alone provide the investor assuaging 
coverage of their oil terminal project in Dorale that they 
desperately want.  Boreh cited the recent attack on the train 
(see reftel) and increased terrorist actions in Somaliland as 
evidence that the terrorist threat in Djibouti has risen 
significantly in recent weeks.  Boreh said "We (US and DJI) 
have those things going on in Somaliland...there are people 
there who could do bad things to Djibouti...we (DJI) know the 
Ethiopians are doing something with the train...we (DJI) are 
going to do some raids and kick the shit out of some people 
to send a message...we (DJI) know that Djibouti is the port 
and airport and if anything happens to them we are 
finished...we (DJI) need the security now, especially with 
the new project in Dorale to make sure that the Americans are 
safe."  He went on to state that the USG must produce some 
tangible assistance in order to reassure the military 
leadership that they (the USG) are serious about improving 
Djibouti's security.  The Djiboutians fear that a terrorist 
attack at this critical juncture in both their economic 
development and the development of what they hope will be a 
long term U.S. presence would be the end of their grand 
strategy.  Major Anderson reminded those present that 
Djibouti is not alone in their frustration and that the US 
remains committed to helping Djibouti with their security 
needs.  He noted that the same system used to assist Djibouti 
is assisting Afghanistan and Iraq but that it takes time. 
 
THE MESSENGER 
------------- 
 
¶3. (S/NF) Abdourahman Boreh is the financial face of Ismail 
Omar Guelleh.  He was a relatively minor player in local 
Djiboutian commerce until he rode Guelleh's coattails up the 
power ladder to his current seat as his richest and most 
influential economic advisor.  There are three villas 
constructed on Djibouti's exclusive Haramous peninsula, the 
first belongs to President Guelleh, the second to Boreh, and 
the third to ex-President Gouled.  Boreh orchestrated the 
2001 Arta conference which gave birth to the Transitional 
National Government in Mogadishu.  Boreh's economic base 
starts as the local representative of British-American 
Tobacco.  When shipments of his cigarettes were seized on the 
Somaliland frontier in 2000 it was enough to have the 
frontier closed and chill Djiboutian- 
Somaliland relations until reparations were paid almost two 
years later.  Boreh had a category 1 visa hit (later overcome 
by Security Advisory Opinion) which Post believes stems from 
an Interpol investigation into the illegal exportation of 
Ethiopian coffee.  He is not widely popular and an opposition 
contact said "Boreh would sell you his mother if it meant he 
could make a dime."  He has close ties to Dubai and the UAE, 
including Dubai Ports International.  He owns the largest 
construction company in Djibouti, Supreme, and has profited 
handsomely from construction contracts at Camp Lemonier, home 
to U.S. forces in Djibouti. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4. (S/NF)  Boreh and Guelleh have big plans for the oil port 
terminal in Dorale.  These plans hinge upon a U.S. Naval 
contract with Emirates National Oil Company (ENOC) and a 
continued good reputation for security and stability at their 
current port.  Increased collaboration with the U.S. on many 
fronts has elevated their threat profile and in light of 
recent explosions on the train and activities in Somaliland, 
they are getting nervous.  Boreh wants to see the 
oft-promised security assistance and he wants to see it 
yesterday.  Djibouti is less a country than a commercial city 
state controlled by one man, Ismail Omar Guelleh.  He sent 
his money man, who usually does not attend these meetings, to 
deliver a message. The Djiboutian Government believes (or 
wants us to believe) they are at greater risk to terrorist 
attack than ever before.  They hope this message will 
expedite delivery. 
 
¶5. (S/NF) Post would like to expedite security assistance as 
well and has spoken about this with CJTF-HOA and will raise 
the issue with DSCA's Europe, Russia, Americas, and 
Sub-Saharan Africa Director, Ms. Jeanne Farmer, later this 
week.  However, we still believe the train incidents do not 
impact the U.S. interest in the Horn and best guesses are 
they relate to larger Djiboutian-Ethiopian frictions. End 
comment. 
SMITH