This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

241333Z Feb 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 000315 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/ABT/BTT FOR DEBORAH MALAC, JACK BOBO 
LAGOS FOR PAS, EB AND FAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON TBIO EAGR KPAO NI
SUBJECT:  NIGERIA AND BIOTECHNOLOGY PUBLIC DIPLOMACY 
 
REFTEL:  STATE 15050 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The U.S. Mission in Nigeria would like to 
propose several projects to expand biotechnology awareness 
and acceptance in Nigeria; all are consistent with the 
Mission's biotechnology collaborative efforts with the 
National Agency for Biotechnology Development and Assistance 
(NABDA) and broader USG objectives in the sector of economic 
development.  We propose three workshops for legislators, 
government officials, and journalists in Nigeria and a press 
tour in the United States for Nigerian journalists.  Total 
financing requested is $110,000.  End Summary. 
 
Biotechnology and Nigeria 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The U.S. Mission's proposal for biotechnology aims at 
dispelling the false impressions many Nigerians have 
regarding biotechnology and the safety of genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs) by helping a broad cross-section 
of government officials, members of parliament, and the 
media better understand the benefits of biotechnology. 
Nigerians have learned about GMOs primarily as a result of 
the U.S.-European debate over GMOs and packaging 
requirements.  The issues of GMO safety for human 
consumption as well as their possible threat to local 
environmental diversity are issues that have received 
treatment in the Nigerian press, and ones that could easily 
retard acceptance of GMOs by Nigerian farmers.  Nigerian 
journalists who have participated in mission programs on 
biotechnology as well as officials of the Nigerian Agency 
for Biotechnology Development and Assistance (NABDA) have 
suggested that anti-Western elements may latch onto 
biotechnology and unnecessarily raise people's fears. 
Nigerian audiences, based on their comparatively lower 
educational levels than in the U.S., are less conversant in 
scientific matters in general, let alone biotechnology.  The 
Internet is very popular in Nigeria, but Internet material 
is often used to misinform - as much as inform - public 
debate.  Nigerian officials and other supporters of 
biotechnology require training and further information in 
order to explain biotechnology to the Nigerian public as 
well as promote acceptance. 
 
¶3.  Nigeria is poised to take advantage of the potential of 
biotechnology to improve agricultural productivity because 
it has a supportive national biotechnology policy, a 
biosafety framework, and the scientific capacity to conduct 
and apply biotechnology research.  There exist already 
strong linkages with a number of U.S.-based institutions. 
USAID/Nigeria is assisting Nigeria in developing its 
biotechnology capacity through technical training to members 
of the National Biosafety Committee, establishing 
collaborative research projects with Ahmadu Bello 
University, National Root Crops Research Institute and other 
key Nigerian research institutes, and providing balanced 
information on biotechnology to policy makers, the public 
and other key stakeholders. The research goal of the Nigeria 
project is to develop insect-resistant cowpea, which would 
eliminate the need for farmers to apply pesticides, and 
increase the yield of this staple food crop by 5-10 times. 
The project is scheduled to debut in April 2004, but already 
anti-GMO groups have been speaking out in Nigeria. 
 
U.S. Mission Proposal 
--------------------- 
 
¶4.  Biotechnology research in Nigeria is coordinated through 
the NABDA, and USAID's program receives oversight and 
support from a steering/advisory committee chaired by NABDA 
and comprised of members of research and academic 
institutions, relevant ministries, and the U.S. Mission.  On 
February 19, the steering committee met to discuss public 
awareness and education issues, and the urgent need to lay 
the groundwork for the introduction of the biotech form of 
cowpea.  One of the first steps, however, is to train 
relevant segments of the Nigerian government who will be 
called upon to present biotechnology and explain its 
benefits to the public.  To this end, three workshops are 
proposed: 
 
--  A series of workshops/seminars for elected officials at 
the Federal and State levels; i.e., National Assembly 
members as well as State Assembly members, plus members of 
the key ministries involved in biotechnology.  We envision 
about two weeks of programming (two- or three-day programs) 
to cover approximately 200 people.  Trainers from the U.S. 
might include a biotechnology resource person (academic 
researcher), a staff member of a U.S. state assembly who 
could explain how constituents' concerns are handled in the 
U.S. where biotechnology is concerned, and a public policy 
specialist who can advise on strategies to assist Nigerian 
elected officials in the public policy debate over 
biotechnology in Nigeria.  Estimated cost:  $35,000 
 
--  A series of workshops to enhance the capability of 
ministry, NABDA, NAFDAC (Nigerian equivalent of the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration) university, and other keys 
spokespersons to deal with the press and NGOs on the subject 
of biotechnology.  We envision approximately ten days 
programming (four-day sessions) to include approximately 40 
people.  Trainers might include a public affairs member of 
the FDA, a representative from the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, and a media specialist who can provide the 
journalists' perspective.  A key element of the workshop 
will be for participants to give mock press conferences and 
be critiqued for their presentations and ability to respond 
to questions.  Estimated cost:  $25,000 
 
--  A third workshop will focus on journalists and training 
for the media.  Nigeria has an incredibly large and diverse 
pool of journalists covering television, radio and print. 
We would like to do four workshops outside Abuja and Lagos 
to provide training to many of the state and regional media 
personnel who will be handling biotechnology reporting as it 
is introduced to farmers in the rural areas.  We envision 
two to three weeks of programming (two- to three-day 
programs) to cover roughly 80 people.  A trainer could be a 
journalism professor or another expert conversant in 
biotechnology issues.   Estimated cost:  $10,000 
 
--  A tour for six Nigerian media participants to visit the 
United States for a thorough introduction to biotechnology. 
A tour might include stops in Washington, D.C., St. Louis, 
MO (Monsanto and the Danforth Institute), Cornell or 
Tuskegee University, etc.  Estimated cost:  $40,000 
 
¶5.  Nigeria can benefit greatly from biotechnology. 
Formerly a net food exporter within the West African region, 
Nigeria now imports food, including basic staples such as 
rice.  Lack of investment in the agricultural sector by 
successive governments has left Nigeria with a still 
rudimentary system of subsistence agriculture, with most 
farmers unable to afford fertilizer and improved seeds.  The 
Nigerian government anticipates that biotechnology may help 
to jumpstart Nigeria's neglected agricultural sector to not 
only feed Nigeria but also become once again the bread 
basket of West Africa by enhancing food security in the 
region.  However, Nigeria's farmers as well as the general 
public will need to be educated on the benefits of 
biotechnology, and the Nigerian government requires 
assistance in taking the lead.  Nigeria threw off decades of 
military rule in 1999, but vestiges of authoritarian 
practices are still evident throughout the political system. 
Nigerian officials, many of whom served under military 
leaders, are not used to engaging the public and defending 
policy choices.  The proposed workshops will go far to 
ensuring they can adequately defend the inevitable charges 
that this is a dangerous USG initiative forced upon the 
Nigerian public.  Nigerian journalists also require training 
so they will have a basic grounding in the facts regarding 
biotechnology and will not easily be misled by the vast 
amount of negative material that is available on the 
Internet.  The U.S. Mission appreciates EB consideration of 
its proposal at a very critical time for biotechnology 
efforts in Nigeria. 
 
ROBERTS