This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 000446 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA 
STATE FOR IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR OFRIEL 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, FEBRUARY 4-8: HEZBOLLAH 
PRISONER SWAP; IRAQI TRANSITION TO SELF-RULE; SIGNING OF 
TIFA; HALLIBURTON; MAJOR NON-NATO ALLY STATUS FOR KUWAIT 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  The February 7 signing of the Trade and 
Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) by US and Kuwaiti 
officials received prominent coverage, focusing on the 
economic benefits to be gained by Kuwait through the 
agreement. Also on the news pages, a number of MPs are 
requesting discussion of the "Halliburton portfolio" in the 
February 9 session of the National Assembly. 
 
The dean of Kuwait's College of Shariah Law is reported to 
have issued a statement vigorously opposing political rights 
for Kuwait women as inconsistent with Islamic law.  The 
report contradicts earlier statements by Kuwait's Minister 
of Awqaf (Islamic affairs) suggesting that the country's 
religious establishment might support such reforms. 
 
A prominent liberal writer states that if US troops leave 
Iraq too soon, the country "will be thrown into turmoil," 
and that Arab countries must assist Iraq "in shouldering the 
historic responsibility" of transitioning to self-rule. 
 
A number of prominent conservative writers have hailed the 
Hezbollah prisoner exchange as a victory for Hezbollah and 
validation of the organization's violent tactics. One writer 
views the prisoner exchange and Sharon's proposal to remove 
Israeli settlers from Gaza as cynical political maneuvering, 
while another believes the proposed evacuation of Gaza is a 
"positive step. if Sharon translates words into deeds." END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News stories: The signing of the Trade and Investment 
Framework Agreement (TIFA) between the US and Kuwait in 
Washington DC received front page coverage in both Al-Qabas 
and Al-Watan on February 8. Al-Watan carried a quote by 
Secretary of Commerce Zoellick stating, "Kuwait is a real 
 
SIPDIS 
friend." Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that Minister of Trade and 
Industry Abdullah Al-Taweel said the signing of the TIFA 
will "boost Kuwait's economy." 
 
Al-Qabas reports that MP Ahmad Al-Saadoun announced his 
intent, along with other MPs, to request a discussion in the 
National Assembly tomorrow on the "Halliburton portfolio." 
According to Al-Saadoun, the "Halliburton portfolio" has 
turned into "one of the sides of a triangle of corruption." 
 
The Dean of the College of Sharia and Islamic Studies at 
Kuwait University, Dr. Mohammed Al-Tabtabaei, announced 
that it was not "religiously legitimate" for women to 
participate in National Assembly elections, either through 
voting or running for office, Al-Anba reports on its 
February 7 front page. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on February 8 that "government sources" 
state that the issue of redrawing electoral constituencies 
in Kuwait "is not a priority." The National Assembly is 
reported to be "optimistic" over the possibility of changing 
the constituencies. 
 
All papers report this week on rumors of an upcoming 
reshuffling of the Council of Ministers (Cabinet) involving 
three ministers. According to Al-Qabas, one of the ministers 
involved would be the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of 
State for Cabinet Affairs and Minister of State for National 
Assembly Affairs, Mohammed Deifallah Sharar. 
 
President of the American University of Kuwait, Dr. Shafeeq 
Al-Ghabra, said the new private university "seeks to 
graduate students capable of expressing themselves and 
working independently," according to Al-Qabas. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Arab Deterioration and Independent Power" 
Dr. Shafiq Al-Ghabra wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(2/7):  "Developments throughout the Arab world foretell 
that the situation in Palestine and Iraq will steadily 
deteriorate. The situation will not improve unless Arab 
countries adopt economic and political reforms. If US troops 
in Iraq leave prematurely, then Iraq will be thrown in 
turmoil, violence and fear. Therefore, the right course of 
action is for the Arab countries to assist the Iraqis in 
shouldering their historic responsibility." 
 
¶4.  "Hezbollah:  A Model" 
Former MP Dr. Abdel-Mohsen Jamal wrote in independent Al- 
Qabas (2/4):  "With great efficiency, Hezbollah was able to 
impose a new political formula on the Zionists. In the eyes 
of the Arabs and the whole world, Hezbollah has become a 
model for how to handle a ferocious enemy that has no 
respect for the Arab. This ability will impel the Zionists 
into further caution. Hezbollah's leader, Nasrallah, has 
become a symbol of successful leadership. 
Hezbollah's success [has]. proved the validity of the 
concept of resistance." 
 
¶5.  "Suspect Deal and Evading the Peace Process" 
Ghazi Al-Jassem wrote in independent Al-Qabas (2/8):  "Ariel 
Sharon is similar to Saddam Hussein, because no one can 
predict his next move. Governed by our emotions, and 
inebriated with the sense of victory, we did not take stock 
of the real meaning behind Israel's release of the Lebanese 
and Palestinian detainees. In fact, we have failed on the 
strategic level. [D]espite a respite in Palestinian suicide 
actions that only harm the Palestinians, Sharon did not 
proceed with the peace process. He is a man of war, not 
peace. Today, Sharon is proposing to evacuate the Gaza 
settlements, but it is only a new maneuver before meeting 
President Bush." 
 
¶6.  "Withdraw and Build Your Wall" 
Dr. Ayed Al-Manaa wrote in independent Al-Watan (2/7):  "The 
relocation of Jewish settlements from Gaza, which will 
eventually end the Israeli occupation is good news, 
according to Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qorei. It is a 
significant measure, because it will positively affect the 
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Sharon's proposal may ease 
hostility between the two sides, although this may not apply 
to the religious and nationalistic extremists on both sides. 
For peace to succeed, Sharon's words must be translated into 
deeds." 
 
¶7.  "My Concern is the Umma [Islamic Nation], Not America" 
[Conservative Islamist] Salafi Salem Al-Nashi wrote in 
independent Al-Watan (2/8):  "American cultural hegemony 
over the Islamic world is obvious. Everyone is aware that 
Western culture is enveloping the world, but this hegemony 
incorporates the inclusion of Kuwait as a [major] non-NATO 
strategic ally. [C]ondemning and vilifying America will not 
benefit the Umma [Islamic Nation]." 
 
¶8.  "Eliminating Terrorism" 
Mohammed Musaed Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(2/8):  "Almost two and a half years after the events of 
9/11 and since President Bush announced his campaign against 
terrorism, it is clear that terrorist activities have 
increased globally. Meanwhile, Israel has exploited the 
situation by labeling those who carry out the Intifada as 
terrorists while Sharon, the corrupt terrorist who will be 
carrying the votes of American Jews, will be welcomed by 
Bush [in Washington DC]. Terrorism will not cease unless 
America changes its foreign policy and stops its policy of 
double standards. The reason behind terrorism is the feeling 
among oppressed people that the greatest country in the 
world does not care to eliminate the injustice they are 
suffering." 
 
URBANCIC