This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2014 
TAGS: PGOV BM
SUBJECT: THAN SHWE AND KHIN NYUNT - A CONTRAST IN STYLE 
 
Classified By: CDA, a.i Ronald K. McMullen for reason 1.5(D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Prime Minister Khin Nyunt and Senior 
General Than Shwe hosted weekend functions involving 
Rangoon's diplomatic corps that illustrated the marked 
contrast in their styles.  Khin Nyunt is engaging and 
polished, while Than Shwe is distant, grandiose, and strikes 
some observers as somewhat dazed.  Despite these differences 
in style, both seem committed to the generals' continued 
control of Burma, either in uniform or in mufti.  End Summary. 
 
Khin Nyunt Woos Dip Corps... 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Apologizing to the heads of embassies and UN 
organizations for being largely inaccessible to them since 
becoming Prime Minister on August 25, General Khin Nyunt 
hosted a "Social Dinner" at a large GOB guesthouse January 
2nd.  On arrival he slowly made his way down the receiving 
line, smiling and chatting amicably with many along the way. 
He gave a speech in excellent English, reviewing the 
highlights of 2003 and pledging amity and prosperity for 
¶2004.  During dinner a band performed mostly western music 
while an army of waiters served the nine-course meal.  At the 
evening's conclusion the Prime Minister (dressed in 
traditional Burmese garb) and Mrs. Khin Nyunt shook the hands 
of all departing guests and wished them a happy new year. 
Clearly General Khin Nyunt attempted to play the role of the 
charming host and gracious Prime Minister. 
 
Than Shwe's Independence Day Celebration 
 
¶3.  (C) Senior General Than Shwe, in contrast, hosted a black 
tie affair January 4 to mark the 56th anniversary of Burma's 
independence from Britain.  He arrived at the venue -- 
ironically, Burma's largely unused parliament building -- in 
a dress uniform featuring an assemblage of medals and 
decorations.  Than Shwe was preceded down the receiving line 
by a tight phalanx of twenty one photographers who shot rolls 
of film during the four minute exercise.  (Comment: why 
twenty one photographers in a country with a 
government-controlled press?  Certainly one or two official 
photographers would have sufficed, unless the press gaggle 
was to glorify the spectacle of Than Shwe's entry.)  Trailed 
by Prime Minister Khin Nyunt and Vice Senior General Maung 
Aye, the Senior General worked his way down the diplomatic 
receiving line, robotically shaking the hands of the 
assembled, often not even looking at them, let alone saying 
anything. 
 
Is That Senior General Anawrahta or King Than Shwe? 
 
¶4.  (C) After the 400 guests had quickly wolfed down dinner, 
all moved into a large hall and were treated to a Myanmar 
Cultural Night.  The evening's climax was a musical and dance 
tribute to King Anawrahta, the first unifier of the country. 
The Founder King was seen inspecting public works projects, 
paying homage to venerable monks, rallying the troops and 
citizenry, and building a stable and prosperous kingdom.  At 
that point the dancers froze and a cinema-sized screen began 
showing heroic clips of General Than Shwe inspecting public 
works projects, making donations to monks, addressing huge 
outdoor USDA rallies, and winning the adulation of all.  The 
blatant political crudeness of the "cultural show" caused 
some diplomats and UN officials new to Rangoon to gasp, then 
choke back snickers, although the more experienced knew this 
to be Than Shwe's standard fare. 
 
¶5.  (C) Comment:  Khin Nyunt as polished politician versus 
Than Shwe as a Brezhnev-like dotard and buffoon are two 
superficial images probably reinforced among some who 
attended these two events.  It does not automatically follow, 
however, that there is any real policy difference between 
them despite the vast difference in style and demeanor.  Many 
diplomats charmed by Khin Nyunt's hospitality may be tempted 
to view him as a political "moderate," when the evidence 
seems to indicate he remains steadfastly committed to the 
generals' control of Burma.  He may be keener than some, 
however, to have the generals' control continue in civilian 
attire, as opposed to Than Shwe's penchant for heavily 
bemedaled uniforms.  End Comment. 
McMullen