This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPA, DRL, AND IO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2014 
TAGS: PREL KDEM CU GT CHR
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA ON CUBA UNCHR RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 20401 
     ¶B. GUATEMALA 317 
 
Classified By: Poloff Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Ambassador Carla Rodriguez, Director General for 
Multilateral Affairs at the Foreign Ministry, called a 
meeting with Poloffs on February 11 to discuss the Cuba 
Resolution at the 60th CHR.  This is the first time in our 
collective memory that the GOG has reached out to us on the 
Cuba resolution.  Rodriguez wanted to know if other countries 
in the region, mentioning Costa Rica and Peru specifically, 
had made decisions about sponsoring the resolution.  We 
shared our understanding that numerous countries were 
considering sponsorship, and urged the GOG to cosponsor. 
Rodriguez implied that being able to place Guatemala in the 
middle of a broader regional consensus on the Cuba resolution 
would make it easier for the GOG to sell a favorable decision 
on cosponsorhip to its domestic critics. 
 
¶2. (C) A/S Noriega discussed the issue at the highest levels 
of the GOG during his February 3-5 visit (ref B).  As a 
result, President Berger committed to "do the right thing." 
Rodriguez stressed that no policy decisions have been made 
yet and repeated her appeal for information on the decisions 
of regional neighbors.  PolCouns reminded Rodriguez that the 
resolution would be more effective coming from Latin America, 
and that the U.S. and others are prepared to use all of our 
influence to lobby on behalf of the resolution. 
 
¶3. (C) Turning to our non-paper (reftel), which we had 
relayed to Rodriguez in advance of A/S Noriega's visit, 
Rodriguez pointed out that the Commission had last year 
rejected Costa Rica's amendment which called attention to the 
plight of the 75 detained activists.  The problem with the 
Commission is its composition, Rodriguez said, adding that 
supporters of the resolution last year had ultimately decided 
that it would be counterproductive to insist on an strong 
(read accurate) resolution against Cuba that would fail, 
allowing Cuba to claim victory. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment and action request: The MFA appears to have 
instructions from the President to fulfill his commitment to 
"do the right thing" on the Cuba resolution, and is looking 
for any cover they can provide to respond to the inevitable 
critics of the decision, including some in the government. 
As cosponsors, especially within the region, begin to line 
up, please advise what information we can share with the GOG 
to bolster its case for cosponsorship. 
WHARTON