This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS YEREVAN 000072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CACEN ESIDEREAS 
 
E.O. 12598: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM AM UNUS
SUBJECT: ARMENIA REQUESTS U.S. SUPPORT FOR COMMISSION 
ON HUMAN RIGHTS CANDIDACY 
 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
¶2. (SBU) The Ministry of Foreign Affairs sent us a 
diplomatic note dated January 8 requesting U.S. support 
for Armenia's candidacy for the United Nations 
Commission on Human Rights. 
¶3. (SBU) Begin text of MFA diplomatic note: 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of 
Armenia presents its compliments to the Department of 
State of the United States of America and has the honor 
to inform that the Government of Armenia has decided to 
present its candidature for the re-election to the 
United Nations Commission on Human Rights for the 
period 2005-2007 at the elections to be held during the 
organizational session of the United Nations Economic 
and Social Council in May 2004. 
The Government of the Republic of Armenia has been 
highly committed to the promotion and protection of 
human rights since the very first days of its 
independence.  Armenia joined to over 40 legal 
instruments in the field and has been consistently 
implementing a comprehensive reform package for further 
strengthening the legal and practical frameworks for 
the protection and promotion of human rights.  Armenia 
has been co-operating extensively with numerous 
international and regional organizations, including the 
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and 
the Council of Europe, in order to consolidate its 
domestic efforts, that have been duly credited by all 
of its partners from among the international community. 
This year the Armenia Parliament has adopted the Law on 
the Ombudsman and ratified the 6th Protocol of the 
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights 
and Fundamental Freedoms.  These decisions once again 
certify Armenia's choice of a society appraising humane 
values and its firm commitment to the ideals based on 
the respect of human rights and human dignity. 
Armenia considers the issue of the promotion and 
protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms 
as a cornerstone for international security, stability 
and durable peace.  Armenia regards the UN Commission 
as one of key international for a for the discussion of 
human rights issues and in previous years has extended 
its support and co-sponsorship to more than 150 
resolutions adopted by the Commission.  During its 
ongoing membership term, Armenia is bringing its active 
participation to the deliberations of the Commission on 
key human rights issues.  The Government of Armenia 
believes that it can uphold its contribution to the 
work of the Commission and had therefore sought re- 
election to it. 
The Government of Armenia would highly appreciate the 
support of the United States Government to Armenia's 
candidature and would like to assure that if re- 
elected, Armenia will continue to do its utmost for 
further cooperation on human rights among all UN member 
states. 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of 
Armenia avails itself of this opportunity to renew to 
the Department of State of the United States of America 
assurances of its highest consideration. 
End text. 
WALKER