This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ACCRA 000317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR JAMES PADGETT 
DAKAR FOR ED JONES 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2009 
TAGS: EAIR GH
SUBJECT: TSA INSPECTS GHANA AIRWAYS AFTER 6 CANCELLED 
FLIGHTS 
 
REF: ACCRA 139 
 
Classified By: EconChief Chris Landberg for Reason 1.5 (d) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Transportation Security Administration 
(TSA) officials came to inspect flight security operations 
procedures at Ghana Airways (GA) because of the recent 
incident regarding a banned co-pilot. After enduring six 
flight cancellations, TSA Officials were able to finally 
inspect a Ghana Airways flight on Tuesday February 10. While 
concerned with some procedural and communications 
inconsistencies, TSA was comfortable enough with GA 
procedures to leave. The only concern by TSA now is the 
sustainability of the procedures. Post believes Ghana Airways 
permission to operate to and from the U.S. is worthy of 
further scrutiny. End summary. 
 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) Three Transportation Security Administration officials 
visited Accra from February 3-10 expecting to evaluate at 
least three Ghana Airways flights to the U.S. In light of the 
recent banning of a Ghana Airways co-pilot who had flown to 
the U.S. after his name appeared on a No Fly list, TSA 
officials came to Ghana to address what it saw as gaps in the 
level of security scrutiny to which Ghana Airways subjected 
its passengers. (Reftel) 
 
 
Initial Meeting with Ghana Air CEO Owusu, Not Good 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Econoff accompanied TSA officials to an initial 
meeting with Ghana Airways (GA) CEO Phillip Owusu on February 
¶4. Cordial and straightforward, TSA officials explained their 
expectations of the evaluation--to witness GA preparation for 
and departure to U.S. airspace, including check in, ground 
security, aircraft search, ground safety and secondary search 
procedures. TSA officials explained that every airline 
operating to and from the U.S. is required to implement all 
Emergency Amendments (EAs) sent out by the TSA. Ghana Airways 
was under scrutiny due to its inconsistent communications 
with TSA regarding EAs and the banning of a Ghana Airways 
co-pilot from flying to U.S. airspace (a reflection of Ghana 
Airways disregard of operating procedures). TSA reps asked 
for assurances that the Acting Head of Security Dennis 
Bassaku could be reached on a 24-hour basis, necessitating a 
mobile phone and consistent computer access at his office. 
Owusu assured TSA that these things would be provided, but 
that is where his cordiality ended. 
 
¶4. (C) Owusu used the occasion to express his frustration at 
the way the banned co-pilot, who was arrested and taken to a 
holding facility in Maryland, was treated in the U.S. He 
further accused the U.S. Embassy and the TSA of being remiss 
in not notifying him personally that the co-pilot was banned 
from U.S. airspace. Larbi tried to explain that the pilot 
flew to the U.S. after appearing on the No Fly List that 
Ghana Airways itself must vet and cross check before its 
flights leave for the U.S. Larbi explained further that the 
pilot's prolonged detention was a surprise to him, but TSA 
has no control over what happens to a person who appears on 
the No Fly List and subsequently flies to the U.S. Owusu 
continued to insist that U.S. authorities were remiss in 
their duties, not Ghana Airways and that he would continue to 
pursue diplomatic action. 
 
 
A Tragedy of Errors 
------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) The inspection team, expecting to begin work the night 
of their February 3 arrival, was thwarted by a technical 
difficulty that left the Ghana Airways flight grounded in 
Baltimore. The next opportunity to inspect a flight was to be 
the night of February 4, but again, technical difficulties 
prevented the flight from arriving to Accra and the outbound 
flight to the U.S. was cancelled. Four more last-minute 
flight cancellations left TSA wondering whether Ghana Airways 
was trying to prevent inspection. During their inspection of 
preparations for one of the cancelled flights, TSA was 
encouraged that GA security authorities had the correct No 
Fly and Selectee lists. However, they were discouraged by the 
improper procedures for vetting the list and the absence of 
six EAs for which GA Security Chief Bassaku had previously 
acknowledged receipt and implementation. Non-compliant 
airlines can be penalized USD 11,000 per passenger per flight 
for not following all security regulations. The inspectors 
noted that given what they had seen, they would have sent 
their concerns to their superiors in Brussels and Washington. 
Throughout the drama, airline authorities did not notify TSA 
of planned and unplanned flight schedules, instead TSA had to 
call GA operations workers to get this information. 
 
 
Final Meeting with Ghana Airways CEO and Inspection 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6. (C) Frustrated by what they saw, TSA met with the DCM and 
Econoff on February 10 to explain their message to GA CEO 
Owusu and to consider the consequences of GA's non-compliance 
and the cancellation of every flight they were to inspect. 
Econoff accompanied TSA to meet Owusu for a second time. The 
inspectors told Owusu that they must inspect a flight 
operation to the U.S., GA must improve its system of vetting 
the No Fly and Selectee lists and Security Chief Bassaku must 
have 24-hour contact capability (including a cell phone and 
internet capability). In a far less combative mood than our 
previous visit, Owusu assured TSA officials that they would 
see a complete flight operation (wheels up) that day. He also 
admitted that Ghana Airways financial difficulties had 
crippled operations. The officials were able to observe a 
full operation to the U.S. February 10. There were only some 
minor procedural issues that concerned them. Airline security 
employees seemed to grasp what they needed to do to ensure 
compliance. TSA's only concern was what would happen after 
they left. They wanted some assurance of sustainability in a 
compliance program for GA and are going to communicate more 
frequently with Security Chief Bassaku. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) After a number of tries, GA security officials sort 
of got it right. However, TSA concerns about sustainability 
of compliance procedures are well taken. GA's cash-strapped 
status undermines GA's ability to operate flights to and from 
the United States. Owusu has again made a plea to Italian 
officials (this time religious officials) to intervene on 
Ghana Airway,s behalf to "reschedule" the 25 million dollar 
debt owed to Alitalia that prevents Ghana Airways planes from 
being serviced.  After 40 plus years in the International Air 
Transport Association (IATA), Ghana Airways was kicked out in 
¶2002. The GoG, while forcing GA to continue to operate, has 
done little to financially support its operations. TSA 
officials explained that security (handled by them in DHS) 
and safety (handled by FAA) have been operationally 
separated.  At some point, the FAA should make a decision on 
when an airline's financial status prevents it from complying 
with safety regulations for flights into the U.S. If past 
performance on security and operations activities are any 
indication, Ghana Airways is an airline deserving of further 
scrutiny. End Comment. 
Yates