This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000194 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/24/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL YM COUNTER TERRORISM TERFIN DOMESTIC POLITICS
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR,S 1/19 MEETING WITH SHEIKH AL-AHMAR: 
ZINDANI, OPPOSITION CONTACTS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, reasons 1.5 (b), (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  In a 1/19 meeting with Ambassador, Sheikh 
al-Ahmar appealed for more high-level contact with the 
Embassy and stoutly defended the bona fides of Sheikh Zindani 
and al-Iman University which the Ambassador disputed.  The 
Islah leader,s unusually conciliatory approach appears 
calculated to forestall the long-pending U.S. designation of 
Zindani as engaged in terrorist financing.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador, accompanied by DCM, called on Parliament 
Speaker Sheikh Abdullah al-Ahmar on January 19 at the 
latter,s invitation.  Ahmar, who also heads the Islah Party, 
had a two-part agenda to discuss with Ambassador.  After 
opening discussion of Yemen,s economy and potential for 
increased international investment and tourism, Ahmar 
explained at some length his desire for increased high-level 
contact between Islah and Embassy Sanaa -- especially 
personal contact between himself and Ambassador.  He reviewed 
his own status as head of a major tribal coalition, in 
addition to his party and Parliamentary roles, noting that he 
represented the views of a broad sector of the Yemeni 
population.  Ahmar stressed that dialogue between the Embassy 
and Islah could help control rumors, dispel misinformation 
and avoid misunderstanding.  Finally, Ahmar touted his role 
in buttressing Yemen,s security and stability, including by 
reining in mosque preachers and young Islahis. 
 
¶3. (C) Ambassador welcomed the prospect of increased dialogue 
with Islah and its leader, pointing out that the Embassy had 
long maintained regular working level contact with Islah 
officials.  He underscored the Embassy,s commitment to 
dialogue with Parliament and with all parties, including the 
opposition. 
 
¶4. (C) Ahmar,s second focus was on al-Iman University and 
its head, Sheikh Abdul Majid Zindani.  Sheikh al-Ahmar said 
he knew the USG had "question marks" regarding Zindani, and 
asserted that Zindani is a reasonable, responsible man and 
that al-Iman is a normal educational institution and not 
linked to extremism.  The Ambassador disagreed and noted that 
ROYG security authorities had found that numerous extremist 
suspects had links with al-Iman University and questions 
about its status are thus justified.  Similarly, questions 
about Zindani are well founded, the Ambassador insisted. 
Ahmar reiterated that Islah felt a responsibility for Zindani 
and al-Iman University, and asked that the Ambassador discuss 
with him any adverse information the USG might receive on 
either.  The Sheikh concluded that dialogue could dispel 
misunderstanding.  The Ambassador reiterated a willingness 
for contacts with Islah as an opposition party, but pointedly 
declined to enter into a dialog on Zindani or al-Iman 
University. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: Ahmar,s pitch on behalf of Sheikh Zindani 
may be an attempt to pre-empt the long-pending U.S. 
designation of Zindani (and/or institutions linked to him) as 
engaged in terrorist financing.  It is notable that Ahmar 
declined to make any similar pitch on behalf of Sheikh 
Mohamed Ali Hassan al-Moayed, who awaits trial in the United 
States after extradition from Germany.  End comment. 
 
HULL