This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

041344Z Feb 04C O N F I D E N T I A L HARARE 000201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER, TEITELBAUM 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2014 
TAGS: PGOV ZI
SUBJECT: GUTU ELECTION DAYS CALM BUT IRREGULARITIES PERSIST 
 
REF: HARARE 122 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL OFFICER KIMBERLY JEMISON FOR REASONS 1.5 B/D 
 
 ¶1. Summary. (C) Observations by Poloff two diplomatic 
colleagues, and the Zimbabwe Election Support Unit (as 
reported by both the independent and state-owned press) of 
the Gutu North parliamentary by-election indicate that voting 
was calm and observers more welcome than in previous 
elections. Nonetheless, several electoral irregularities as 
reported in the press and to embassy personnel suggest that 
the process is still not transparent, free, or fair and will 
need substantial revision prior to the next parliamentary 
elections in 2005. End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Everything Calm on Voting Days 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) On February 3, Poloff visited Gutu North to observe 
the second day of voting in the parliamentary by-election for 
the seat left vacant by Vice President Simon Muzenda,s 
death.  Poloff observed very little activity in the five 
polling stations she visited.  Unlike previous elections, the 
polling stations were free of campaign literature and party 
supporters and Poloff had little difficulty entering the 
polling stations.  The presiding officers were helpful and 
willing to chat about voting activity.  (Note: The week prior 
to the election, The Herald ran an article in which it 
paraphrases the Electoral Supervisory Commission rule that 
allows accredited diplomats to enter polling stations to 
observe voting using only their official diplomatic identity 
cards. End Note.)  Poloff was warmly received at the Gutu 
North Command Center, where she made a courtesy call, and was 
given a list of polling stations.  Although there was a 
visible police presence, they were  helpful rather than 
threatening. 
 
¶3. (U) Diplomatic colleagues from other missions visited Gutu 
North on February 2 and noted the calm and absence of obvious 
campaigning and violence, an observation shared by the 
electoral watchdog Zimbabwe Election Support Unit (ZESN). The 
diplomats had more difficulty entering the first polling 
station than Poloff even after getting a letter from the 
constituency registrar but then had no problem entering the 
other two they visited.  ZESN lamented some electoral 
officials and party representatives, lack of familiarity 
with the rules regarding observers, as there were problems 
with other observers gaining access to polling stations. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Electoral Irregularities Persist 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The period preceding the election was fraught with 
allegations of electoral irregularities and violence in the 
constituency.  The Daily News reported on 2 February that the 
opposition party Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) alleged 
that ZANU-PF, through the Registrar General, added 7000 
voters from Harare to the Gutu North voters roll.  In the 
same article, the MDC claimed to have not seen the 
consolidated voters roll for the Gutu North election, as the 
law prescribes.  The Zimbabwe Independent (30 Jan) quoted a 
ZESN report condemning ZANU-PF,s alleged donations at 
rallies as not following procedure and akin to vote- buying. 
 
¶5. (U) The independent press has published several articles 
highlighting violence in the run up to the election.  The 
Daily News reported on 30 January that suspected ZANU-PF 
supporters stoned buildings and set ablaze a hut owned by MDC 
supporters earlier in the week.  In another incident, the MDC 
candidate Crispa Musoni alleged that ZANU-PF supporters held 
him hostage.  The Zimbabwe Independent reported that at least 
two people had been kidnapped and tortured in the weeks 
preceding the election. 
 
¶6. (C) Comment. Despite the seeming tranquility of the 
election on voting days, the election cannot be judged to be 
free or fair because the process is still not transparent nor 
does it follow the independent election procedures, as 
recommended by the SADC Parliamentary Forum.  Press reports 
on violence, fraudulent voter participation, and the absence 
of free campaigning cast a pall on ZANU-PF efforts to promote 
this election as being free and fair. End Comment. 
SULLIVAN