This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

201341Z Jan 04UNCLAS AMMAN 000435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON MIDDLE EAST ISSUES 
 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- Lead story in all papers today, January 20, focuses 
on the Jordanian parliament debate on and rejection of 
the Jordanian government's plan to raise prices and 
taxes.  Another major story highlights Jordan's 
official response to the Israeli Prime Minister's 
"threat" to Jordan with regard to Jordan's campaign 
against Israel's separation wall.  Foreign Minister 
Marwan Muasher said that the separation wall not only 
harms the Palestinian people's interests, but also 
Jordan's national security. 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "Sharon's warning will only make us stronger" 
 
Center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour 
(01/20) editorializes:  "With rejection and 
denunciation, Jordan's political arena received 
Israeli Prime Minister Sharon's warnings to Jordan 
about the repercussion of Jordan continuing its 
campaign against the racist/colonialist separation 
wall..  As Jordanians, we are proud and honored of the 
role that our leadership and our government is playing 
in the national battle against the policy of racist 
isolation and the New Berlin Wall.  Jordan, leadership 
and people, past, present and future will continue to 
support the Palestinians' legitimate and just right to 
freedom and independence, self-determination and to 
establishing an independent Palestinian state with 
Jerusalem as its capital.  Jordan, in its political, 
diplomatic and judicial battle against the racist wall 
of separation, is actually defending its own strategic 
security and its national interests..  We express our 
pride and underscore our faith in the stances and 
policies of our Hashemite leadership and our 
government, and we say that this position will only 
become more firm and solid in the face of the rude 
warnings of Israeli officials.  Nothing is going to 
dissuade us, not for a single moment, from providing 
all help and support to our brotherly people west of 
the river until that day when they attain their 
freedom and independence." 
 
-- "Rejected threats" 
 
Semi-official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai (01/20) 
editorializes:  "Because there is no alternative to 
just and balanced peace and because the will of he 
international community, the human community and the 
Israeli moderates agree with that principle, the 
Israeli government is the one that bears full 
responsibility for impeding the peace process and the 
resulting repercussions on its relations with the Arab 
world.  Instead of hailing irresponsible accusation 
and empty threats, it would be better to listen to the 
voice of reason and to stop usurping lands and rights 
and differentiating between peoples' suffering, for 
this is a sure recipe for endless struggles.  What is 
required is to strengthen and build on what has been 
achieved in the peace settlements and to fulfill, 
before it is too late, the peace requirements, and to 
stop playing with minds and ridiculing other people's 
intelligence." 
GNEHM