This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 HANOI 000513 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB/IPC WILSON AND EAP/BCLTV 
STATE ALSO PASS USTR BURCKY/ALVAREZ AND BRYAN 
STATE ALSO PASS USPTO FOR URBAN 
STATE ALSO PASS LIBRARY OF CONGRESS FOR TEPP 
USDA FOR FAS/FAA/AO HUETE 
USDOC FOR LASHLEY AND 4431/MAC/AP/OPB/VLC/HPPHO 
USDOC ALSO FOR ITA/TD/OTEA/JJANICKE AND ITA/TD/SIF/CMUIR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR ETRD ECON VM IPROP BTA
SUBJECT: VIETNAM:  EMBASSY INPUT FOR 2004 SPECIAL 301 REVIEW 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
REF:      (A) STATE 29549 
          (B) 03 HANOI 2795 
          (C) HANOI 406 
          (D) 03 HCMC 1035 
          (E) HCMC 0115 
 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy recommends continued placement of Vietnam 
on USTR's Special 301 Watch List for 2004 as enforcement of 
IPR in Vietnam remains weak and IPR violations are rampant. 
We do not believe elevation to the Priority Watch List is 
warranted, however, as: 
 
-- Vietnam continued to make some progress in strengthening 
its IPR legal regime in 2003, with new regulations on the 
protection of layout designs of integrated circuits, 
royalties, border protection for copyright, procedures for 
establishing IPR for industrial designs and advertising (as 
it relates to IPR). 
 
-- The Government of Vietnam maintains a strong public 
commitment to IPR protection and works closely with 
international donors, including the USAID-funded Support for 
Trade AcceleRation (STAR) project. 
 
-- The U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA) with its 
major provisions on IPR, codifies Vietnam's commitment to 
make its IPR regime TRIPs-consistent. 
 
-- The size of the market for U.S. intellectual property 
products in Vietnam, though growing, remains small, given 
Vietnam's low GDP per capita, one of the lowest in the 
world. 
 
END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Continued Placement on Special 301 Watch List Warranted 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Embassy recommends that USTR keep Vietnam on its 
Special 301 "Watch List" for the coming year because IPR 
piracy in many product categories remains rampant, despite 
some progress in strengthening the IPR legal regime over the 
last year.  While Vietnam sporadically conducted law 
enforcement actions against IPR violations, IPR enforcement 
remains the exception rather than the rule.  Additionally, 
Vietnam is behind schedule in meeting the IPR commitments 
included in Chapter Two of the BTA, the majority of which 
were due to be implemented no later than December 10, 2003. 
Finally, market access barriers, especially with regard to 
"cultural products" continue to impede the availability of 
legitimate product, further complicating efforts to combat 
piracy. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
BTA - Strong IPR Commitments, but lagging implementation 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶3. (U) Chapter Two of the BTA, which entered into force on 
December 10, 2001, codifies Vietnam's commitment to bring 
its IPR legal regime and enforcement practices up to 
international standards by December 2003, to protect IP 
consistent with WTO TRIPs standards, or in some cases, to 
provide protection stronger than TRIPs.  The BTA covers the 
fields of copyright and related rights, encrypted satellite 
signals, trademarks (including well-known marks), patents, 
layout designs of integrated circuits, trade secrets, 
industrial designs, and plant varieties.  The BTA 
incorporates by reference the major substantive provisions 
of the principal international conventions governing IP, as 
well as the WTO TRIPs Agreement.  Vietnam's leadership has 
expressed consistent, strong support for implementing fully 
Vietnam's commitments in the agreement, including the IPR 
chapter. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Despite strong public support for BTA 
implementation, the GVN is lagging in implementing its IPR 
obligations, particularly those related to enforcement.  The 
majority of Vietnam's IPR-related obligations in the BTA 
were due to be implemented no later than December 2003. 
These obligations specifically include providing expeditious 
remedies to prevent and deter infringement, prompt and 
effective provisional measures, and criminal procedures and 
penalties for willful trademark counterfeiting or 
infringement of copyrights or neighboring rights on a 
commercial scale.  Vietnam also committed, upon entry into 
force of the BTA, to enforce existing laws, the U.S.-Vietnam 
Copyright Agreement, and the Paris Convention.  No such 
routine and reliable enforcement exists.  Additionally, in 
the BTA, Vietnam committed to accede to several 
international intellectual property conventions "promptly." 
Although the BTA entered into force in December 2001, 
Vietnam has not yet submitted its applications to the Berne 
Convention (literary and artistic works), Geneva Convention 
(phonograms), and Brussels Convention (satellite signals). 
These applications have been pending signature by the 
President since the fall of 2003 (Ref B). 
 
--------------------------------- 
Improvements in IPR Laws Continue 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Vietnam began extensive legal reforms to bring its 
IPR laws and regulations into compliance with BTA (and 
therefore TRIPs) standards before entry-into-force of the 
agreement.  In 2003, Vietnam made some progress on 
strengthening its IPR legal framework.  The GVN issued the 
following legal and regulatory IPR reforms over the past 
year: 
 
-- A March 13, 2003 decree (Government Degree No.24/2003/ND 
CP) detailing the implementation of a November 2001 
Ordinance on Advertisement.  This Decree required 
advertisements for inventions, utility solutions, industrial 
designs and trademarks, appellations of origin of goods, 
geographical indications, trade names, copyright and related 
rights to ensure the veracity of IPR-related information. 
The Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) was tasked 
with coordinating with the Ministry of Culture and 
Information (MOCI) to oversee implementation of this Decree; 
 
--        A May 2, 2003 decree (Government Decree No. 
42/2003/ND-CP) on Industrial Property Protection for Layout 
Design of Integrated Circuits.  This decree established 
protection for original semiconductor integrated circuit 
layout-designs.  However, it did not protect the principles, 
processes, or methods used by such integrated circuits, or 
information or software included with integrated circuits. 
This was the first regulation to address the protection of 
the layout design of integrated circuits in Vietnam; 
 
--   A July 01, 2003 circular (Inter-Circular No. 
21/2003/TTLT-BVHTT-BTC) jointly promulgated by MOCI and the 
Ministry of Finance (MOF) on royalties.  This Circular 
established guidelines for royalty payment regimes and the 
use of royalty funds for some types of works (stipulated in 
Government Decree No.61/2002/ND-CP of June 11, 2002). The 
Decree also prescribed specific grades or percentages of 
royalties for each genre and scale of work; 
 
--        A July 16, 2003 circular (MOCI Circular No. 
43/2003/TT-BVHTT) on implementation of the March 13, 2003 
Decree on Advertising.  This circular stipulated that 
advertisements adhere to the properties of the trademark as 
announced or registered with the relevant State management 
agencies; 
 
--        An October 17, 2003 circular (Joint Circular 
No.58/2003/TTLT-BVHTT-BTC) on copyright protection for 
import and export commodities at the border, jointly issued 
by the MOCI and the MOF.  This Circular provided guidelines 
for registration to protect most goods subject to copyright 
according to the Law on Customs and related regulations. The 
Circular entitled organizations or individuals with 
registered goods to request customs officers to seize 
imports or exports that are suspected of copyright 
violation; 
 
--   A November 5, 2003 circular (MOST Circular 
No.29/2003/TT-BKHCN) on the Procedures for Establishing 
Industrial Property Rights for Industrial Design.   This 
circular simplified the procedures and requirements related 
to establishing IPR for industrial designs.  It abolished 
the requirement for notarized documents, reduced the number 
of application copies required, and shortened the time 
required for both the formal examination and the substantive 
examination of claimed industrial designs from 13 months to 
9 months; and, 
 
--   A November 5, 2003 circular (MOST Circular 
No.30/2003/TT-BKHCN) on the Procedures to Establish 
Industrial Property Rights for Patent and Utility Solutions. 
The circular streamlined NOIP's internal regulations and 
processes with respect to the registration of patents and 
utility solutions.  The period of time required for 
examination of invention or utility solution applications 
was reduced from 3 months to 1 month for the formal 
examination and from 18 months to 12 months for the 
substantive examination.  The Circular also established 
procedures on granting, invalidating and canceling the title 
of protection of patents and utility solutions. 
 
¶6. (U) In addition, a number of other laws and regulations 
are in the draft stage, including: 
 
-- The GVN has incorporated comments from the International 
Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) 
Secretariat into its draft ordinance on new plant varieties. 
 
SIPDIS 
The GVN expects to submit the draft to the National Assembly 
in June and to accede to UPOV some time in 2004; 
 
-- The Supreme People's Court continues to revise an amended 
draft Civil Procedure Code, which provides the legal basis 
for IPR enforcement procedures. The GVN expects to approve 
the amended Code by the end of 2004; and, 
 
-- There are several draft regulations on IPR enforcement, 
which the GVN expects to finalize in 2004.  These include 
joint circulars between the MOST and: 1) the Ministry of 
Finance on industrial property protection at border; 2) the 
MOT on market control over domestic goods with respect to 
industrial property protection; 2) the Ministry of Post and 
Telecommunications (MPT) on settling domain name disputes 
that relate to IPR; and, 4) the Ministry of Planning and 
Investment on protection of businesses' trade names. 
 
-------------------- 
Piracy Still Rampant 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) While there was some progress on reforming the legal 
and regulatory regime over the past year, there has been 
little, if any, impact on the proliferation of counterfeit 
and pirated goods in Vietnam.  Hanoi, HCMC and most other 
major cities in Vietnam are rife with music CD, VCD and DVD 
shops, with 100 percent of the U.S. product on sale pirated. 
Also rampant are video rental shops in which all the videos 
are pirated.  Trademark violations are also prevalent, with 
all types of clothing and other items carrying unlicensed 
versions of famous trademarks available at shops of all 
sizes, including large state-owned stores, throughout the 
major cities.  None of these areas of piracy appear to have 
been reduced over the past year. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In one exceptional trademark case in August, the 
Can Tho Department of Science and Technology (DOST) fined 
the Vietnam Beverage Company (VBC) approximately USD 660 for 
infringing the Sunkist trademark, ordered VBC to stop 
producing and distributing products confusingly similar to 
the Sunkist trademark, and ordered the removal of the 
infringing labels from tens of thousands of cans, bottles 
and cartons. 
 
¶9. (SBU) State-owned television and cable stations 
sporadically show unlicensed U.S. films on local television 
and cable channels.  Most of these films are "borrowed" from 
legitimately licensed channels (such as HBO and Star Movies, 
which do not allow dubbing) and dubbed in Vietnamese for 
widespread viewing.  Public cinemas as well as private cafes 
sporadically show pirated films, although this problem is 
not as widespread as the retail sale of pirated DVD, VCD or 
videocassette versions of the same films. 
 
¶10. (U) In terms of consumer and business software for PC's, 
piracy is the norm.  Anecdotal evidence and industry sources 
suggest that GVN agencies use mostly pirated software on 
PC's in government offices.  However, at its annual New 
Year's party, Microsoft awarded several GVN departments with 
prizes for their use of legitimate software.  Microsoft 
experienced an estimated fifty percent growth in its sales 
to government agencies and state-owned enterprises in 
Vietnam this year.  U.S. companies engaged in sales here of 
such software continue to complain that, even if they 
significantly drop licensing charges, Vietnamese businesses 
and government agencies generally will not buy legitimate 
product because they have no budget for software and because 
of the ready availability of pirated versions. 
Alternatively, some businesses and government agencies 
purchase a limited number of legitimate copies, which they 
then install on numerous machines (far exceeding the 
limitations set by the licensing agreement). 
 
¶11. (U) Software piracy is also a strong disincentive for 
local software developers.  Most companies choose to sell 
their products only as packages bundled with hardware 
because stand-alone software is easily and quickly copied 
and sold on the local market. 
 
------------------------ 
Enforcement Remains Weak 
------------------------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) Despite the stated commitment at the highest 
levels of the Vietnamese Government to creating a body of 
law on IPR consistent with international norms and meeting 
Vietnam's international commitments, IPR enforcement remains 
weak.  The organizational structure of GVN IPR agencies is 
complicated and bureaucratic; multiple agencies are tasked 
with overlapping functions or, equally problematic, gaps are 
left in coverage.  Institutional experience on IPR 
enforcement is extremely low.  Government IPR agencies focus 
primarily on "administrative" enforcement of IPR laws, and 
are mostly limited to issuing administrative findings and 
occasionally issuing warnings either by letter or orally to 
small retailers of pirated material.  At the local level, 
Vietnam's enforcement personnel seem almost completely 
uninformed on Vietnam's own laws and how to implement them. 
From the police to the courts, Vietnam's judicial system is 
relatively unaware of the rights of IPR holders or how to 
prosecute, adjudicate, and enforce those rights.  Currently 
there are no procedures in place to provide recourse or 
compensation to rights holders whose rights have been 
violated. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Market Management Bureau (MMB), an enforcement 
agency within the Ministry of Trade, engages in some IPR 
enforcement, usually in response to specific complaints from 
IPR holders.  In one notable case in 2003, the MMB raided 
multiple shops and one state-owned factory in Hanoi selling 
counterfeit Nike products and later destroyed all of the 
goods confiscated during the raids.  However, no fines were 
levied against the infringers (Ref C).  Additionally, in 
September, inspectors from the HCMC Department of Culture 
and Information (DCI) raided an optical media shop in HCMC 
and confiscated over 100,000 items (mostly Vietnamese music 
CDs) (Ref D).  At the time of the HCMC raid, local press 
reports quoted the relevant officials as saying the shop 
owner would be prosecuted, a claim echoed privately in 
meetings with Congenoffs.  Yet, several months later, there 
has been no prosecution and DCI sources say the case has 
been referred back to the district police for further 
"investigation." 
 
¶14. (U) Vietnam's agencies do from time to time engage in 
publicized enforcement campaigns that target unlicensed 
goods, including those involving copyright and trademark 
violations, but also those with "illicit or pornographic 
content."  MOCI reported that in the first eleven months of 
2003 its inspectors carried out approximately 19,000 
surprise inspections (an increase of more than 6,000 over 
2002).  MOCI inspectors collected fines of 5 billion VND 
(about USD 318,000) in 2003 and forwarded documents for 
criminal liability prosecution of 12 cases.  Two cases on 
copyright violation were brought to court for trial. 
According to NOIP, the Market Management Bureau (MMB) 
detected and handled 5,805 cases of producing and trading in 
counterfeit goods - of which about one third were related to 
IPR. (Note:  The majority of the rest are related to food 
safety.  End note.) 
------------------------------------------ 
Lack of Availability of Legitimate Product 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶15. (U) Given the relative poverty of Vietnam, with a per- 
capita GDP of around 400 dollars, the size of the market for 
U.S. IP product remains relatively small.  While losses to 
piracy are as high as 100 percent of the market, the dollar 
value remains a tiny fraction of losses faced by U.S. IPR- 
related companies in the rest of the region.  In addition, 
some types of products, such as those deemed "cultural 
products," are still subject to censorship and control 
regulations that impede market access.  That said, Vietnam's 
economy has much potential and, with a well-educated 
population of 80 million, it will eventually become one of 
the major economies in the region.  Even now, the consumer 
pool is clearly growing.  The prevalence of motorbikes 
costing in excess of 6000 USD on city streets, the number of 
shops offering higher-end consumer electronics, and the 
popularity of restaurants and clubs with near Western prices 
take credence away from the oft-repeated assertion that 
Vietnamese simply cannot afford legitimate products. 
Expensive software suites may remain out of reach for small 
businesses but the price of the latest pop album may not be 
beyond the means of young urban consumers. 
 
----------------------- 
Growing Domestic Demand 
----------------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) One relatively recent development has been 
evidence of a increasing awareness in many sectors of 
Vietnam's economy of the value of IPR protection for 
Vietnamese products both in Vietnam and abroad.  While this 
understanding is still only evident among a small percentage 
of the population, it is growing.  Clearly reflecting this 
development, several industries in Vietnam have established 
business associations, which identify IPR as one of their 
priority concerns.  These new associations include:  the 
Vietnam Software Association (VINASA); Vietnam center for 
Protection of Music Copyright (VCPMC, established in April 
2002); the Recording Industry Association of Vietnam (RIAV, 
established June 2003); and the Literature Copyright Center 
of Vietnam (LCCV, to be formally established in the fourth 
quarter of 2004).  These associations are all relatively new 
and inexperienced in lobbying.  It will clearly take time 
for them to learn to lobby effectively the GVN on IPR 
issues. 
 
¶17. (U) In a recent, rather lavish, display of trademarks 
and branding the Ho Chi Minh City government organized a 
"Festival Honoring Vietnamese Trademarks" (Ref E).  The 
festival's main component was a nighttime parade that 
traveled down a main boulevard through the city's preeminent 
shopping and commercial district.  The parade's floats each 
represented a well know Vietnamese company and celebrated 
the company's products.  The Ho Chi Minh City People's 
Committee Chairman opened the evening's festivities with a 
speech extolling the value of Vietnamese businesses.  The 
prominence of logos, brand names, and company banners was an 
encouraging sign that local business and government leaders 
understand the importance of this issue, or at least the 
protection of Vietnamese brands. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Technical Assistance helps Build Enforcement Capacity 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶18. (U) In 2003 Vietnam received considerable IPR-related 
technical assistance from a number of foreign donors, NGO's 
as well as multiple USG agencies.   This assistance included 
conferences, seminars, training, establishment of an IPR 
resource collection in a library in HCMC, study tours and 
review/comments on draft pieces of legislation.  In 2004, 
Vietnam will continue to receive a significant level of IPR 
related technical assistance.  Of particular note, the 
Support for Trade AcceleRation (STAR) Project, (the USAID- 
funded technical assistance program specifically addressing 
BTA implementation issues) plans to provide the following 
IPR-related technical assistance to the GVN: 
-- Support for revising the IPR section of the Civil Code. 
STAR will provide the Ministry of Justice with extensive 
comments on draft revisions to the IPR section (Part VI) of 
Vietnam's Civil Code as part of MOJ's efforts to bring the 
Civil Code into compliance with the BTA (and TRIPs).  This 
will include changes required to conform to the various 
international IP conventions noted in the BTA (particularly 
Berne, Geneva and Brussels). Follow-on activities will 
include technical workshops with the MOJ drafting team and 
key National Assembly committees as well as a large public 
seminar; 
 
-- Support for Development and Promulgation of a Civil 
Procedure Code.  Star will support a retreat and technical 
workshops for key drafters, Vietnamese experts and key 
National Assembly deputies working on the revision of 
Vietnam's Civil Procedure Code; 
 
-- Capacity building for courts that will handle IPR cases. 
Specific initiatives include a study mission for the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme People's Court and four additional 
senior judges and staff to the U.S and IPR training for 20- 
30 judges from key courts throughout Vietnam; 
 
-- Support for the MOJ's efforts to draft a decree on IPR 
remedies through comments on drafts and technical workshops; 
 
-- Support for MOJ efforts to draft a Code on Judgment 
Enforcement by providing comments on an initial draft 
concept paper, organizing several technical workshops, and 
organizing a study tour to the U.S. for key experts 
responsible for drafting the Code to learn how the U.S. 
judicial system enforces court judgments; 
 
-- Support for stronger IPR enforcement at the local level 
through training for a core group of the Economic Police (a 
division of the Ministry of Public Security tasked with IPR 
enforcement); supporting an IPR enforcement workshop with 
the HCMC People's Committee under the lead of its Department 
of Science and Technology; and supporting publication of a 
guidebook on IPR enforcement; 
 
-- Support for GVN efforts to improve IPR enforcement at the 
border through workshops with customs officials on border 
measures; 
 
-- Support for the further development of Vietnamese 
copyright stakeholders through technical assistance to the 
Copyright Center of Vietnam and the Recording Industry 
Association of Vietnam.  The focus will be on amending the 
legal framework to enable the functioning of collective 
management organizations and their activities; 
 
-- Support for GVN efforts to accede to UPOV in 2004 through 
training and policy seminars; and, 
 
-- Support for efforts by MOCI and the Ministry of Trade to 
develop regulations on optical disc production and 
distribution. 
 
----------------------------- 
Conclusion and Recommendation 
----------------------------- 
 
¶19.  (SBU) Vietnam will remain a market in which IPR 
violations are of concern for at least the foreseeable 
future.  That said, the BTA and Vietnam's desire to accede 
to the WTO provide us with strong tools for engaging the GVN 
on IPR enforcement.  U.S. policy should continue to work 
toward ensuring Vietnam's commitments are translated into 
good law and regulation in the near term and effective 
enforcement in the medium term.  Further USG funding for 
technical assistance in IPR, particularly with respect to 
building capacity for IPR enforcement in Vietnam's law 
enforcement and judicial organs, would greatly advance this 
objective.  At the same time, Mission intends to continue to 
press senior GVN officials at every opportunity to address 
IPR piracy and counterfeiting in Vietnam.  We will continue 
to stress that legal reform is not sufficient for Vietnam to 
meet its obligations -- it must enforce its own laws -- and 
that lack of IPR enforcement will hinder the GVN's attempts 
to attract information technology investment. 
 
¶20.  (SBU) RECOMMENDATION:  Embassy believes it important to 
maintain consistent pressure on Vietnam to enforce IPR. For 
that reason, we recommend Vietnam be maintained on USTR's 
Special 301 Watch List in 2004. 
BURGHARDT