This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 000149 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2014 
TAGS: PARM KNNP PREL KN NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA AND DPRK MISSILES 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 96 
 
     ¶B. 03 ABUJA 2199 
 
Classified By: CDA RICK ROBERTS FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
¶1. (S/NF) SUMMARY: Nigeria has continuing military 
cooperation with the DPRK, but the Nigerians tell us they are 
only talking about missiles to keep the door open for 
military aid from the DPRK, and do not intend to procure 
missiles or their technology.  DPRK VP Yang Hyong-sop is 
visiting Nigeria this week for meetings with various Nigerian 
leaders, including President Obasanjo, and Nigerian VP Atiku 
has been Yang's main host.  After Yang's meeting with Atiku 
January 28, Atiku's spokesman said various things at 
different times to the press about Nigerian interest in 
missiles.  President Obasanjo's Senior Special Assistant, 
Ad'Obe Obe assured the CDA on January 29 that no military 
cooperation of any kind was discussed in Obasanjo's meeting 
with Yang, and that the GON had no intention of purchasing 
missiles or missile technology from the DPRK.  We asked the 
senior MFA official in-country on January 29, PermSec 
Wadibia-Anyanwu, for further information on what transpired, 
which she said she would provide.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C) The DPRK VP is on an official visit to Nigeria, hosted 
until today by Nigerian VP Atiku Abubakar.  In publicized 
meetings with Yang, Obasanjo and Atiku thanked the DPRK for 
assistance to Nigeria for last year's All Africa Games, and 
discussed possible joint economic projects.  The Nigerian 
press reported that the projects would be in Adamawa and 
Nasarawa states.  Then VP Spokesman Onukaba Ojo startled 
everyone by speaking of the DPRK sharing ballistic missile 
technology with Nigeria, an MOU, and Nigeria's need to 
enhance the capability of its military for peacekeeping and 
to protect Nigeria. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶3. (S/NF) Recently North Korea has made an effort to expand 
its defense cooperation ties with Nigeria.  In 
August-September, a North Korean delegation led by Deputy 
Defense Minister Jong Chon-dok met with Nigerian Chief of 
Defense Staff GEN Ogomudia to discuss the possible sale of a 
wide variety of weapons systems to Nigeria.  According to DAO 
Abuja sources (REF B), the North Korean delegation confessed 
it badly needed hard currency and was willing to sell 
"anything in their inventory" to Nigeria.  Reportedly, a 
Memorandum of Understanding concerning defense cooperation 
was signed during Jong's visit.  Despite the MOU and North 
Korea's offer to sell "missiles and submarines," the GON 
expressed the greatest interest in procuring a radar system 
to better monitor air traffic within the country. 
 
¶4. (S/NF) North Korea also dispatched a small team of 
engineers in early January to assess the Defense Industries 
Corporation of Nigeria (DICON) factories as a prelude to a 
North Korean takeover of the recently suspended Chinese 
efforts with DICON.  DAO Abuja reporting (REF A) confirms 
that China suspended its DICON program after the Nigerian 
government failed provide the agreed upon funding.  Sources 
within the Nigerian military believe it is unlikely the North 
Korean efforts to rehabilitate DICON will be successful, but 
the GON is willing to go along anyway if the North Koreans 
are willing to foot the bill. 
 
---------- 
ENTER YANG 
---------- 
 
¶5. (C) DPRK VP Yang then came to town.  Nigerian VP Atiku's 
office put out a press release late January 27 that (inter 
alia) Atiku reiterated Nigeria's desire for a peaceful world 
devoid of constant threat of nuclear war, that Nigeria 
understood the antecedents of North Korea's nuclear program, 
that Nigeria expected North Korea to support Nigeria's bid 
for a UNSC permanent seat, that the GON would continue to 
cooperate with the DPRK in the defense sector, and that Atiku 
expressed hope that the next Nigeria-DPRK Joint Commission 
(meeting) "would bring about the signing of many agreements." 
 The next day, January 28, Yang had meetings with Obasanjo 
and Atiku, and Atiku's spokesman started making comments to 
reporters. 
 
¶6. (C) President Obasanjo's Senior Special Assistant, Ad'Obe 
Obe, came to the Embassy the next morning, January 29, to 
assure the CDA that no military cooperation of any kind was 
discussed in Obasanjo's meeting with Yang, and that the GON 
had no intention of purchasing missiles or missile technology 
from the DPRK.  The CDA thanked him for that assurance.  CDA 
and PolCouns took advantage of an already scheduled meeting 
with the MFA PermSec on other business January 29 to ask her 
about what had transpired and give her a copy of the 
Department Spokesman's January 28 remarks.  She responded 
that the press frequently lied and that Yang would be 
visiting the MFA the next day, January 30.  In any case, she 
said, "We have been aware of U.S. concerns generally about 
North Korea."  PolCouns noted that a recording of Atiku's 
spokesman had played on the BBC that morning, saying 
something rather different than what the print press quoted 
from other interviews.  The PermSec allowed that it was 
important to set the record straight, and agreed to provide 
whatever information she could -- including a transcript of 
the print press interview -- on what had transpired. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7. (C) While it is clear North Korea has taken significant 
steps in recent months to bolster its defense cooperation 
with Nigeria, it is highly unlikely the GON would go so far 
as to purchase ballistic missiles.  We believe it likely that 
the MOU on military cooperation that Nigeria and the DPRK 
signed last year does include mention that missile technology 
transfer is possible.  The cash strapped Nigerian government 
has demonstrated a pattern of behavior with several countries 
(Bulgaria, China, India, Israel, Romania, and Russia) in 
which many meetings are held and agreements signed, but 
ultimately the GON fails to deliver the money and no 
transaction takes place.  We will keep after this issue. 
Roberts