This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  CARACAS 000649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR TSHANNON AND CBARTON 
USCINSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
STATE PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OTI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/26/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM VE
SUBJECT: VENEZUELA REFERENDUM UPDATE: 2/25/2004 
 
REF: CARACAS 00503 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Charles S. Shapiro for Reasons 
1.5(b) and (d) 
 
-------- 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) The National Electoral Council (CNE) announced 
February 24 that petition forms with more than one third of 
the signatures to petition the recall of President Chavez 
will be submitted to the CNE's Superior Technical Committee 
(CTS) for further review because they were filled in with the 
same handwriting.  The OAS and the Carter Center issued a 
joint statement February 24 renewing support for a democratic 
process and calling on the CNE to reach a decision by the end 
of February. The Canadian Embassy in Caracas issued a 
statement February 20 reiterating support for the OAS and the 
Carter Center's on-going efforts.  The European Union (EU) 
February 24 expressed "worry" at the CNE's delay in verifying 
the signatures.  OAS Chief of Staff Fernando Jaramillo told 
the Ambassador February 25 pro-GoV CNE Director Rodriguez 
threatened to kick out the international observers if they 
pre-empted the CNE.  Jaramillo said he anticipates more GoV 
delays, at least through March 18.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------- 
CNE Sends Planillas to CTS for Review 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Francisco Carrasquero, president of the National 
Electoral Council (CNE), announced February 24 that 148,190 
petition forms (planillas) will be submitted to the CNE's 
Superior Technical Committee (CTS) for further review.  These 
forms represent roughly 1.3 million signatures of the 3.4 
million submitted by the opposition seeking a recall 
referendum against President Hugo Chavez.  The forms, the CNE 
said, are suspect because they contain some personal 
information filled out in handwriting different that the 
signature (so-called "planillas planas"), allegedly in 
violation of the CNE instructions. 
 
¶3. (U) Pro-GoV CNE director Jorge Rodriguez told reporters 
February 25 that when the norms for the signature drive were 
discussed, the full CNE board was in agreement that every 
signer would have to fill in his or her own data.  Rodriguez 
said that any signature forms with the same handwriting were 
therefore suspect.  He refused to confirm a press report that 
the CNE was planning to start the process by which citizens 
can challenge the validation of their signatures on March 11, 
and reiterated that no signatures have been invalidated. 
Rodriguez rejected the statistical sampling system proposed 
by the OAS and the Carter Center, calling it was 
"statistically deficient." 
 
--------------------------------- 
Statements Supporting the Process 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) The OAS and the Carter Center issued a joint statement 
shortly after Carrasquero's February 24 statement renewing 
support for a democratic process and calling on the CNE to 
continue reach a decision by the end of February.  The 
Canadian Embassy also issued a statement February 20 quoting 
its Foreign Minister and reiterating the GoC's firm support 
for the OAS and the Carter Center's efforts to guarantee a 
"transparent, legitimate and peaceful" referendum process. 
The statement said the citizens' rights are paramount, and 
called on the CNE to adopt methods to ensure maximum citizen 
participation.  (Note: A copy of the Canadian statement has 
been forwarded to WHA/AND).  The European Union (EU) February 
24 expressed "worry" at the CNE's delay in verifying the 
signatures, and called on the CNE to quickly fulfill its 
duties by February 28.  The EU statement reiterated support 
for the OAS team of observers and referred to May 29, 2003 
agreement between the GoV and the opposition to move forward 
with a constitutional process. 
 
¶5. (C) On February 25, OAS Chief of Staff Fernando Jaramillo 
 
told the Ambassador that he had objected to some changes that 
the Carter Center (including President Carter) had wanted to 
include in the OAS/Carter Center message, the OAS had been 
willing to make an independent statement, but compromise 
language was reached just before it was released.  The Carter 
Center had wanted to release the statement before the CNE 
decision, but Jaramillo said CNE Director Rodriguez 
threatened to kick out the observers if they pre-empted the 
CNE.  Jaramillo told the Ambassador that he does not see any 
will in the CNE to reach a decision on the referendum. 
Jaramillo anticipates more delays, at least through March 18. 
 
¶6. (C) Jaramillo considered the statements by the EU and 
Canada very useful.  He said he needs more support from 
countries for the OAS mission, though ruled out most other 
key players in the region.  OAS Permanent Council President 
Durant's visit may not be a good idea now, Jaramillo said, 
especially since the Canadians issued a statement already.  A 
statement from the OAS Permanent Council is not feasible. 
SHAPIRO 
 
 
NNNN 
 
      2004CARACA00649 - CONFIDENTIAL