This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2013 
TAGS: PREL KISL KU
SUBJECT: (C) THE PARADOX OF KUWAIT'S ISLAMISTS 
 
Classified By: CDA FRANK URBANCIC; REASON: 1.4 (D). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  Kuwaiti Islamists face a unique political 
quandary in the Islamic world.  Their ideological suspicion 
of the US resembles what our colleagues in other Muslim 
societies encounter daily, but it runs counter to their 
experience of the US role in liberating Kuwait, which most 
still genuinely appreciate.  END SUMMARY. 
 
(U) The Kuwaiti Difference 
-------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) There is a great difference between Kuwait and all 
other Arab states:  Kuwait is the only one that owes its 
independent existence to the US.  To put it another way, 
Kuwaitis have experienced two things more than any other Arab 
people outside Iraq itself:  the brutal reality of Saddam's 
regime and the saving reality of the US intervention to 
liberate their country.  Most Kuwaitis have not lost sight of 
either of those historical realities. 
 
¶3. (SBU) More than other segments of Kuwaiti society, 
Islamists decry US military "interference" in the region. 
When reminded that the same argument, if heeded, would have 
precluded the liberation of Kuwait in 1991, they concede that 
sometimes US military and political involvement in Arab 
affairs is justified.  They even acknowledge our support for 
the Bosnian Muslims.  But they are routinely unwilling to 
give the US the benefit of the doubt.  When speaking of any 
other situation, they spout the same line that our colleagues 
throughout the region encounter every day:  the US is out to 
oppress Muslims, take Arab oil, and generally do the bidding 
of Israel. 
 
The Irrefutable Realities 
------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Kuwaitis know that the US liberated their country 
from aggression by a neighboring Arab Muslim state, that we 
never seized Kuwaiti oil, and that we have not imposed our 
values or policies:  to this day, Kuwaiti women lack basic 
political rights; even when some other GCC states took steps 
towards normalization with Israel, Kuwait did not.  Whereas 
other Arabs may be able simply to deny these realities, 
Kuwaitis cannot.  Even most Islamists acknowledge these 
irrefutable facts, they just refuse to learn from them. 
 
Despite Our Great Friendship, We Just Don't Trust You 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
   ¶5. C) We have met recently with several prominent Kuwaiti 
Salafis (very conservative Sunnis, essentially "Wahhabis," 
though they would never describe themselves that way, any 
more than Saudi "Wahhabis" would) -- all of them current or 
former Members of Parliament (MPs).  All insisted that we are 
over-stating the number of Shia and under-stating the number 
of Sunnis in Iraq, Iran and Kuwait.  They charged that the US 
is disenfranchising the Sunni Arabs of Iraq. 
 
¶6. (C) One MP, a leading member of the Salafi Movement (aka 
"Scientific Salafis"), claimed that the Afghans were better 
off under the Taliban,   because now "they have drugs and no 
security there."  He alleged that the US targeted innocent 
civilians in Afghanistan and "opened the doors to hell in the 
region."  Even so, he insisted that he only opposes US 
policies, not America itself.  "Maybe some believe the US is 
pure evil," he remarked, but "we do not agree with this." 
Another Scientific Salafi MP criticized the US both for 
intervening (e.g. in Iraq) and at the same time for failing 
to intervene (e.g. in support of the Sunni minority in Iran). 
He said the US must focus on dialogue with the people of the 
Middle East, not just their leaders, who often are not 
representative. 
 
¶7. (C) COMMENT:  We wish we could report a modicum of 
soul-searching on the part of Kuwaiti Islamists, but we have 
not encountered any and do not expect to.  There are enough 
things for them not to like about the current situation in 
the region to keep them from having to face the contradiction 
between their ideological bias and their personal experience: 
 the rise of the Shia, continuing insecurity, and wild rumors 
of Israeli activity in Iraq; increased opium-poppy 
cultivation in Afghanistan; growing talk of educational 
reform at home; the Guantanamo Bay dentainees controversy, 
concerns about possible requests for Iraqi debt relief and 
waiving Gulf War compensation claims, and of course the 
perennial favorites:  US "blind bias" for Israel against the 
Palestinians, and the simple reality that we, who are neither 
Arab nor Muslim, have a large military presence in the region 
and wield enormous influence. 
 
¶8. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED: The inherent contradiction of the 
Islamist position regarding the US undermines their 
credibility with other Kuwaitis, but we do not think it is 
the primary bone of contention between them; beliefs about 
Islam's proper role in society count much more than whether 
the Americans are getting a fair shake. 
URBANCIC