This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT, INL, G/TIP, CA/VO/F/P, INR/NESA 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  01/02/2004 
TAGS: PGOV PINS ECON KFRD CE
SUBJECT:  GSL arrests large number of Sri Lankan illegal 
migrants as part of ongoing crackdown on human smuggling 
 
Refs:  03 Colombo 1343, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Bruce Lohof, Acting Deputy Chief of 
Mission.  Reasons 1.5 (b, d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  In several recent incidents, GSL 
authorities have arrested roughly 350 Sri Lankans 
attempting to illegally migrate to Italy.  The GSL also 
recently repatriated the last of a large number of third 
country nationals (all South Asian) who were arrested in 
mid-2003.  At this point, the government appears to be 
getting something of a handle on the illegal migrant 
problem.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) LATEST ARRESTS:  In three separate 
incidents, GSL authorities recently arrested roughly 
350 Sri Lankans who were attempting to illegally 
migrate out of the country.  The incidents included: 
 
-- On December 26, off the island's western coast, 
roughly 30 miles north of Colombo, police apprehended 
269 Sri Lankans in a boat.  All of those arrested 
remain in jail pending an early January hearing. 
 
-- On December 1, 63 Sri Lankans were arrested at sea 
near Negombo town, 20 miles north of Colombo. 
 
-- On November 23, Police interdicted a truck in 
Negombo carrying 25 people, who were apparently 
intending to leave the country illegally.  The 25 
were initially arrested, but were later released. 
The police are searching for those responsible for 
organizing the effort. 
 
¶3.  (U) In all three cases, those being smuggled were 
reportedly headed for Italy.  According to the police, 
the suspected human migrants believed that the Italian 
government might show leniency to those arrested during 
the holiday season.  According to the police, each 
individual had paid roughly USD 500 to human smugglers, 
with a balance of approximately USD 2,300 due upon 
arrival in Italy. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) REPATRIATION COMPLETE:  After a spate of human 
smuggling attempts of third country nationals in June 
and July 2003 (see Reftels), C.A. Fonseka, Deputy 
Commissioner of Immigration and Emigration, told poloff 
on January 2 that all the foreign nationals involved 
have now been returned to their country of origin.  The 
majority were released and returned soon after their 
interdiction.  The balance -- some 250 Pakistanis and 
Indians -- were convicted of attempted human smuggling 
and sentenced to a year in jail.  Given the high cost of 
incarceration, Fonseka said the GSL had chosen to return 
this last tranche to their home countries and all were 
deported by mid-December. 
 
¶5.  (C) PROGRESS ON ISSUE NOTED:  The GSL appears to 
have been working hard to prevent human smuggling.  In 
recent months, a number of the smuggling organizers have 
been arrested and their rings broken up.  When queried, 
Fonseka said he felt that the successful effort by Sri 
Lankan law enforcement in preventing the large-scale 
human smuggling attempts in June/July had had a notable 
impact on the smugglers and their operations.  The GSL 
continued to remain vigilant, but had not detected any 
additional smuggling attempts involving third country 
nationals in the past several months.  Fonseka added 
that he hoped that those repatriated were delivering the 
message to compatriots that the Sri Lankan authorities 
were tough on human smuggling and that Sri Lanka was not 
the place to attempt such activities. 
 
¶6.  (C) COMMENT:  The government appears to be taking 
the matter of illegal migration extremely seriously.  As 
the problem spiked in mid-2003, the GSL closely 
cooperated with local embassies and launched a 
crackdown, which, as noted, appears to have had some 
success.  That said, with SAARC visa entry procedures 
liberalized and the number of flights linking South 
Asian points gradually expanding, the GSL will have to 
keep on top of the situation. 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT (continued):  As for potential Sri 
Lankan illegal migrants, it is a sad commentary that so 
many are willing to risk life and limb trying to get to 
Europe illegally despite the peace process and economic 
growth at home.  In the meantime, although the impasse 
has not seemed to have any negative impact as of yet, it 
is possible that further cohabitation conflict could 
undermine GSL efforts in this area.  This is especially 
the case in light of lingering confusion over exactly 
who is in charge of the Internal Security (formerly 
Interior) Ministry.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD