This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 000150 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP (HOLLIDAY), WHA/PPC (FALLS), WHA/CAR 
(MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KWMN PHUM DR
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CENTER 
EVALUATION 
 
REF: A. 03 SECSTATE 327381 
 
     ¶B. 03 SANTO DOMINGO 6023 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶1. On December 23 NAS Director and emboffs visited the 
drop-in center for victims of domestic violence in Bani to 
gauge its progess since inception in 2001.  Center director 
Bibiana Nunez continues to run the center with limited 
resources but appears motivated to sustain the center's 
needed presence.  She reiterated her appreciation for the 
USG's fulfillment of requirements outlined in the letter of 
agreement (LOA).  Based on this visit as well as past 
communication (Ref B) the Dominican Government (in this case 
represented by the Secretariat of Women, the National Police 
and the Attorney General) is slowly implementing the LOA but 
much remains to be done.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. The following are responses to Ref A questions: 
 
Fiscal Responsibility 
a) Embassy NAS office has liquidated the following items: 
 
2001: 
--Office furnishings (desks, chairs, ceiling fans, etc): 
$16,329.79 
--3 computers and printers: $3,084.61 
--Office and kitchen supplies: $8,013.98 
--Solar power: $9,094.77 
 
2002: 
--Installation and repair of solar panels: $2,450 
--Solar energy maintenance: $750 
--2002 Mitsubish Truck: $14,525.14 
 
2003: 
--Canon Copier: $1,180 
--Solar energy removal/reinstallation and electrial rewiring 
at new location: $3,695.17 
 
 
b) Purchased items are in use or have been used appropriately 
by the center.  A substantial portion of program funds was 
spent on relocation expenses due to lease problems with the 
previous landlord.  NAS intended to fund training for center 
personnel in 2002, but funds for this purpose were not 
obligated. 
 
c) GODR expenditures for center operations are disbursed by 
three offices: the National Police, the Attorney General and 
the Secretariat of Women.  The following is a breakdown of 
what each office covers: 
 
National Police 
--1 telephone line 
--3 police officers 
--2 police supervisors 
--1 police chauffeur 
--3 psychologists 
 
Attorney General 
--1 telephone line (to be used for Internet connection) 
--salaries for center director, 1 secretary and 1 courier 
 
Secretariat of Women 
 
SIPDIS 
--monthly rent and utilities 
--salary for 1 social worker (recently assigned in January 04) 
--license plates and car insurance for Mitsubishi truck 
 
Meeting Objectives and Goals 
 
d) The center currently has a staff of thirteen.  Center 
Director Bibiana Nunez told emboffs that all staff have been 
trained on the Dominican Republic's Law Against Domestic 
Violence (24-97).  She also said that new staff would be 
trained on the criminal procedures code as well, which is 
scheduled for implementation by September 2004 (septel to 
follow). 
 
e) Legal assistance for victims was limited because the GODR 
has not yet assigned lawyers to the center.  Center Director 
Nunez provides informal legal counsel to clients, but she 
complained that this "complicates her function as a public 
servant".  She often performs several tasks at once, from 
director to lawyer to family therapist to social worker.  The 
following are 2003 statistics about services provided by the 
center: 
 
--1,101 appointments 
--138 cases resulted in family therapy 
--175 "amicable agreements" reached 
--76 arrest orders issued by National Police 
--465 complaints of domestic violence 
--148 domestic violence cases submitted to justice 
--120 provisional protection orders issued by the Public 
Ministry 
 
f) Medical and psychological services were also limited. 
However, 138 cases involved family therapy as mentioned 
above.  In some instances clients were referred to local NGOS 
due to lack of professional staff.  There are no medical 
professionals currently working at the center.  Center 
Director Nunez reported that whenever a client has an obvious 
medical condition (i.e. bruises, scars) she and/or the police 
chauffeur takes the individual to the local hospital, 
conveniently located across the street.  The three 
psychologists provided by the National Police are 
insufficient to meet demand.  According to Center Director 
Nunez, each of the psychologists works 1-2 days a week but 
there is never more than one psychologist available at one 
time. 
 
g) The drop-in center offered approximately 20 community 
seminars during 2003 to raise public awareness about domestic 
violence and legal penalties.  The center also provides 
numerous brochures and posters to local NGOs and associations 
(including the National Lawyer's Association local branch) 
promoting Law 24-97.  The center spearheaded the creation of 
the "Family Unity Movement" in the Peravia province in order 
to promote familial responsbility for proper child-rearing 
and education.  According to Nunez, emphasizing the family 
unit is key to preventing domestic abuse.  In addition, the 
Secretariat of Women formed an inter-agency Network Against 
 
SIPDIS 
Domestic Violence in which the drop-in center is involved. 
 
GODR Commitments 
 
h) Center Director Nunez continues to complain that she does 
not receive 100% support from partners National Police, 
Attorney General and the Secretariat of Women.  Each time 
emboffs visit or communicate with her by phone she reminds us 
of a September 2002 embassy-hosted lunch, during which an 
"informal agreement" was reached on how GODR responsibilities 
for the center would be divided.  Nunez and emboffs came up 
with a list that was then shared with all interested parties. 
 According to Nunez and embassy records, the following 
circumstances exist: 
 
The National Police agreed to provide 10 full time police 
officers, 2 police chauffeurs and 1 telephone line.  To date 
the police have provided 5 police officers, 1 chauffer, 3 
psychologists, and 1 telephone line. 
 
The Attorney General agreed to provide 1 forensic specialist, 
1 secretary, 1 messenger, and 1 telephone line for Internet 
usage.  The center currently has a secretary and a messenger 
provided by the Attorney General's office. 
 
The Secretariat of Women agreed to pay for the center's rent 
and utilities, 2 lawyers, 1 social worker, 2 receptionists, 2 
secretaries and 2 porters (watchmen).  To date, the 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretariat has agreed to pay rent for a 3-year lease 
 
SIPDIS 
(although they failed to maintain rent payments at the prior 
locale) and provided 1 social worker who happens to be a 
lawyer.  The Secretariat also agreed to purchase license 
plates and car insurance for the Mitsubishi truck paid for by 
NAS.  These payments, however, were not fulfilled until 
November/December 2003--several months after the vehicle was 
already in use. 
 
Comment and Additional Observations 
 
¶3. (SBU) Some of the interested parties, namely the National 
Police and the Attorney General, are conveniently using the 
excuse that the LOA was signed between the U.S. Government 
and the Secretariat of Women--not with them.  The 2002 
"informal agreement" probably should have been written as an 
LOA addendum in order to hold everyone accountable.  Future 
LOAs should fully consider all the parties required for 
successful implementation.  In hindsight, the Secretariat of 
Women was probably not the best party with whom to sign an 
agreement.  According to NAS Assistant, the Secretariat of 
Women has been described in some conversations with male GODR 
officials as "a bunch of nagging women."  Officials at the 
National Police, the Attorney General's offfice, the 
Secretariat of Foreign Relations and some NGOs have a 
 
SIPDIS 
negative impression of the Secretariat of Women as being a 
ministry that is good for looking pretty and talking a good 
game but nothing more. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Center Director Bibiana Nunez appears to have her 
heart in the right place but she is not very well organized, 
perhaps due to the lack of GODR support and resources.  She 
seems convinced that her Dominican goverment interlocutors 
react only when the U.S. Embassy tells them to jump.  As a 
result, she frequently calls the embassy whenever something 
goes wrong, no matter how big or small.  She remains 
frustrated and suspicious that certain GODR officials are 
looking to oust her due to the perceived close relationship 
she shares with the embassy.  Nunez continues to hang in 
there, knowing that the embassy stands behind the original 
premise of the center's establishment--to address a human 
rights concern in the Dominican Republic. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The drop-in center definitely has areas for 
improvement, but embassy is of the opinion that the project 
was and is necessary.  Future grants and donations are very 
much needed to pursue other priorities (such as trafficking 
in persons).  Economic conditions are not likely to improve 
anytime soon, and many USG-supported projects will rely on 
U.S. funds more than ever, now that the GODR is struggling to 
meet basic everyday commitments. 
MARSHALL