This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000240 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/BCLTV; CINPAC FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2014 
TAGS: EAID EAGR PGOV SNAR PREF BM NGO
SUBJECT: BURMA: WFP PLANS EMERGENCY FOOD ASSISTANCE TO 
EX-POPPY FARMERS 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Ron McMullen for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The World Food Programme (WFP) plans to 
initiate on March 1 a one-year program to assist former poppy 
farmers suffering from food insecurity.  The program will 
cost about $4 million and target about 180,000 beneficiaries 
in the ethnic Kokang and Wa border areas through 
food-for-work activities, school feeding, and vulnerable 
group feeding.  In addition to consulting with the U.S. 
Embassy, the WFP Country Director recently met with leaders 
of the pro-democracy opposition to discuss the new program. 
The initiative is similar to existing WFP food assistance in 
Burma and also appears to be closely coordinated with UNODC 
counter-drug initiatives in the Wa and Kokang regions.  We 
have faxed the project proposal to EAP/BCLTV.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to the U.N. World Food Programme (WFP) 
Burma Country Director Bhim Udas, WFP plans to target about 
180,000 people in the Kokang and Wa regions with a one-year 
emergency food program to assist former poppy farmers and 
their families who are suffering from severe food insecurity. 
 In response to an urgent request from the Kokang Authority 
and the GOB, WFP already assisted about 50,000 poor ex-poppy 
farmers in the Kokang area during the last three months of 
¶2003. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The "Emergency Food Assistance to Ex-Poppy Farmers" 
is planned for the period March 1, 2004 through February 28, 
2005 and would include almost 10,000 metric tons of food at a 
total cost to WFP of just over $4 million.  A March 2003 
joint assessment of humanitarian needs, conducted by the 
UNODC and JICA (Japanese aid agency), determined that farmers 
in the heart of Burma's poppy regions on average now only 
grow enough rice to live on for about half a year.  U.N. 
agencies expect food insecurity to increase as pressures 
mount on local Wa authorities to cease poppy cultivation 
entirely by 2005.  Currently, the average poppy farmer earns 
about $160 cash per year from the sale of opium, which 
represents roughly 70 percent of the farmer's total cash 
income. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Based on the findings of a recent WFP rapid needs 
assessment, WFP will target 90,000 people in the Wa region, 
60,000 people in Kokang, and 30,000 in Kutkai, Muse, and 
other areas in Shan State.  WFP will assist beneficiaries 
through food-for-work activities (50,000 participants, 
reaching 165,000 beneficiaries), primary school feeding 
(45,000 children), and vulnerable group feeding (5,000 
elderly, disabled, and chronically sick people).  WFP 
currently has a field office in Laukai (Kokang) and to help 
implement the new program will open two additional field 
offices (Lashio and Pangsang).  WFP expects to implement the 
overall program through its existing partners, which include 
CARE, World Vision, and ADRA. 
 
¶5. (SBU) WFP is planning its emergency food program largely 
in response to UNODC's appeal for partners to help implement 
"KOWI" (Kokang and Wa initiative) to keep farmers poppy-free. 
 In the Wa region, WFP will tap into existing UNODC resources 
including office facilities and a comprehensive database.  In 
exchange, UNODC plans to establish a technical coordination 
unit (TCU) within existing WFP facilities in the Kokang 
region as a key first step in implementing its KOWI 
initiative. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Udas, the WFP Country Director, says that the WFP 
food program will be mostly independent of the Burmese 
regime.  However, "NATALA," the GOB's intra-ministerial body 
that administers border area affairs, will facilitate WFP's 
program discussions with local authorities in Special Regions 
#1 and #2 (self-governed by former Kokang and Wa insurgents) 
and secure GOB permission for static and mobile 
communications equipment. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: WFP's Country Director has submitted a 
proposal and budget to his Executive Director in Rome, where 
WFP is expected to make an appeal to donors for support.  In 
addition to his approach to us, Bhim Udas recently consulted 
with members of the NLD's Central Executive Committee on the 
emergency food assistance program.  (Note: We have not heard 
the results of his meeting with the pro-democracy opposition 
leaders.  End note.)  The new WFP program is in line with 
existing WFP food assistance in Burma's central dry zone, 
with repatriated refugees in Rahkine State along the 
Bangladesh border, and also appears to be closely coordinated 
with UNODC counter-drug initiatives in the Wa and Kokang 
regions.  End comment. 
Martinez