This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KATHMANDU 000252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS/NESA JOHN PETERS AND SA/INS 
GREG BAYER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC PTER ASEC NP
SUBJECT: Nepal Wardens Message - Maoist Nationwide 
Strike February 12 
 
On February 6, Post disseminated the following security 
announcement to American citizens in Nepal via its warden 
network.  Post had pre-cleared the message with OCS Desk 
Officer John Peters. 
 
[Begin text] 
 
This wardens message is being issued to alert Americans 
citizens about the Maoists' call for a nationwide "bandh" 
(forced closure of businesses, schools and vehicular 
traffic) for February 12.  In addition, the Maoists 
reportedly are planning a longer-term program of 
demonstrations and bandhs affecting different parts of 
the country from February 8 through March 31.  This 
message advises Americans to exercise heightened security 
precautions and to maintain a low profile during the days 
leading up to the February 12 bandh and throughout this 
period. 
 
In the past, the Maoists have utilized bombings, 
assassinations and other acts of violence to intimidate 
and coerce observance of their forced bandh.  Given the 
high level of pre-bandh violence and the unpredictability 
of these disturbances, American citizens are urged to 
exercise extra caution both during the lead-up to the 
proposed bandh and on bandh dates. 
 
During the scheduled bandh, official Americans are 
advised to minimize non-essential travel.  American 
citizens are urged to maintain a low profile throughout 
the bandh period, traveling as little as possible within 
or outside the Kathmandu Valley.  Taxi and bus services 
may not be available.  If you must travel, wait until a 
pattern of traffic is well-established.  During past 
bandhs, a number of buses, taxis and trucks have been 
attacked. 
 
Americans should also be aware that, in the past, Nepali 
authorities have imposed curfews on short notice for 
various areas, both within and outside Kathmandu.  Often 
the areas affected by the curfew are not clearly defined. 
Outside the Kathmandu Valley, dusk to dawn curfews have 
been imposed in many districts.  American citizens are 
advised to monitor evening media broadcasts closely for 
the latest curfew information and to respect the curfew 
restrictions. 
 
For further information about bandhs, guidance on 
security measures to be followed in the lead up to and 
during bandhs, and information about security conditions 
in Nepal, American citizens are strongly encouraged to 
refer to the Consular Information Sheet for Nepal which 
may be found on the Department of State's home page at 
http://travel.state.gov and the American Embassy in 
Nepal's home page at http://www.south-asia.com/USA. 
 
[End text] 
 
Malinowski