This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MASS YM
SUBJECT: FM AL-QIRBI ON YEMEN-SAUDI BORDER ISSUES 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 28746 
     ¶B. SANAA 372 
 
Classified By: Charge D'Affaires Alan G. Misenheimer for reasons 1.5 (b 
. and d.) 
 
 ¶1. (c) In February 16 meeting (other subjects ref b and 
septel), Foreign Minister Abubakr al-Qirbi elaborated on the 
current border dispute between Yemen and Saudi Arabia.  Qirbi 
affirmed that President Saleh is traveling to Saudi Arabia on 
February 17 to discuss the issue with the Saudi Leadership. 
Qirbi added that there are no preliminary proposals or draft 
understandings in place (e.g. for Saleh and Abdullah to sign) 
concerning Yemen's claim. 
 
¶2. (c) Qirbi said that the SAG erected sand barriers, 
concrete pipelines and barbed wire less than twenty 
kilometers of the border.  Qirbi described the barriers as 70 
km and 50 km long in some places.  Citing the 2000 Jeddah 
Border Agreement, Qirbi said no fortification is allowed 
within the 20 km zone on either side of the border.  He 
commented that the ROYG believes the construction more 
closely resembles a military fortification, as opposed to the 
SAG claim that it is an anti-smuggling measure.  In light of 
recent expanded CT cooperation, Qirbi added that the ROYG is 
concerned because the SAG did not consult with the ROYG 
before it began construction.  On a recent visit to Saudi 
Arabia, Qirbi said that he told Prince Abdullah that the 
construction violates the Jeddah Agreement.  As an 
alternative to the barriers, Qirbi said the ROYG would like 
to see a bilateral agreement to fight smuggling. 
 
3.(c) Comment: Press coverage of the barrier is widespread 
and follows another widely reported dispute where the ROYG 
contended that the SAG undertook unilateral action against 
the ROYG.  This past summer, the SAG banned many agricultural 
imports from Yemen, and the decision was not reversed until 
January and only in response -- according to Yemeni officials 
-- to Yemen's import ban on Saudi goods.  The ROYG, however, 
clearly hopes to resolve the current dispute expeditiously 
under the rubric of wider counterterrorism cooperation 
between the two nations.  End comment. 
MISENHEIMER