This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LILONGWE 000165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USAID FOR AFR/SA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL PHUM PGOV KCOR ECON PTER MI
SUBJECT: FY 2004 ESF REQUEST 
 
REF: STATE 33230 
 
¶1. SUMMARY. Post welcomes the opportunity to submit proposals 
for funding under ESF's Africa Regional Fund. Our four 
proposals are directly linked to MPP goals related to 
counterterrorism, the environment and economic development, 
and democracy and governance. 
 
¶2. Proposals follow: 
 
¶A.  Anti-Money Laundering 
------------------------- 
The GOM's lead agency for combating money laundering, the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi (RBM), has shown the will to identify, 
investigate, and interdict money laundering activities and 
has scored some modest successes over the past two years. 
The banking system's relative underdevelopment, lack of 
expertise in forensic accounting, and resource constraints, 
however, have kept the RBM from identifying and shutting down 
operations suspected of transferring illicit money into and 
out of Malawi. ESF funds could be well-used to increase the 
RBM's skills at investigating suspicious transactions and 
monitoring external financial flows by establishing an 
investigation that would eventually become a Financial 
Intelligence and Surveillance Team (FIST).  Most likely, the 
unit would be a small group that would connect the work of 
RBM's Bank Supervision and International Operations 
Departments.  Liaison between the Departments already occurs, 
but having a team of dedicated and well-trained professionals 
to monitor suspicious transactions would raise the profile of 
anti-money laundering activities. 
 
The main components of an ESF project would be one-time costs 
to equip the FIST, such as computers and training for the 
team members.  Training would be most beneficial if conducted 
in Malawi with an experienced investigator in the country for 
at least 60 days and further available for follow-up. 
Experts could be brought in from South Africa, where the head 
SADC regional trainer for money laundering prevention and 
compliance is located, or from the U.S. 
 
Estimated cost: $100,000 
 
MPP linkage: This project strengthens the Mission's ability 
to support increased GOM participation in the fight against 
terrorism, particularly in the regional context.  MPP Goal 
Paper 2, "Democratic System and Practices", Strategy 3 
supports increased Malawian participation in the regional 
fight against terrorism. A likely impact of this proposal 
would be in the first performance indicator, "Increased 
Support for International and Regional Counterterrorism 
Initiatives". 
 
¶B.  Counter-Terrorism Legislation 
--------------------------------- 
Since the terrorist attacks in the U.S. in 2001, the GOM has 
condemned acts of terrorism strongly, publicly, and 
frequently.  In June of 2003 the GOM matched these words with 
action by detaining and deporting five expatriate Muslims 
believed to be linked to Al Qaeda.  While this operation was 
generally successful, one weakness revealed was the complete 
lack of counterterrorism legislation within the country. 
Though the GOM has ratified eleven of the twelve UN 
Conventions on counterterrorism, such legislation remains 
absent domestically.  The GOM has expressed interest in 
drafting such legislation, and has directly asked the USG for 
assistance. 
 
Post proposes that sufficient ESF funds be allocated to allow 
USG subject matter experts from DoJ to travel to Lilongwe in 
order to work with counterparts at Malawi's interministerial 
Counterterrorism Task Force in drafting counterterrorism 
legislation appropriate for the country's legal system. 
Additionally, the GOM would have a Washington D.C. point of 
contact to consult with on a regular (and as-needed) basis to 
consult with regarding the implementation of and legal 
interpretation of such laws. 
 
Estimated cost: $35,000 
 
MPP linkage: This project supports the Mission's goal of 
increasing support for international and regional 
counterterrorism initiatives.  Malawi has shown its 
willingness to succeed in preventing terrorist activities, 
and with some assistance in capacity building could play a 
constructive role in regional efforts to combat terrorism. 
Strategy 3 of MPP Goal Paper 2, "Democratic System and 
Practices", supports increased Malawian participation in the 
regional fight against terrorism. A likely impact of this 
proposal would be in the first performance indicator, 
"Increased Support for International and Regional 
Counterterrorism Initiatives". 
 
¶C. Environment 
-------------- 
Malawi's ability to supply enough hydro-electric power to its 
people depends heavily on two things: the Liwonde Barrage, 
which retains and releases the waters of Lake Malawi and the 
Shire River; and the string of Nkhula power stations, all of 
which are located down-stream of the barrage on the lower 
Shire River.  A growing encroachment of aquatic weeds around 
the Liwonde Barrage and the in the river has contributed to 
electricity supply problems, which have worsened to the point 
of hindering economic development.  The Electricity Supply 
Company of Malawi (ESCOM) has said the weeds and increasing 
siltation in the river basin have severely hampered power 
generation.  Aquatic weeds clogging the aging Liwonde Barrage 
and Nkhula power stations worsen in the rainy season as heavy 
rains flood the riverbanks and send mats of thick reeds 
adrift. Suspension of power generation, necessary to remove 
weed build up and flush filtration systems, in turn prevents 
businesses, medical facilities, and government services form 
operating.  One report noted growing sanitation problems in 
Blantyre because the Water Board did not have adequate 
electricity to properly manage the water systems. 
 
Post proposes that ESF funds be provided to allow 
subject-matter experts to conduct an engineering assessment 
and architectural refurbishment of the Liwonde Barrage.  Such 
work would help better regulate water flow and control 
aquatic weed levels in the Lower Shire River where the 
hydroelectric plants are located. 
 
Estimated cost: $300,000 
 
MPP linkage: This project supports MPP Goal Paper 1 in 
fostering economic growth and development.  Advances made in 
this sector will contribute to the country's ability to 
stabilize its fragile economy, contribute to political 
stability, and encourage sustainable environmental 
management. 
 
¶D.  Controlling Corruption 
-------------------------- 
Malawi's Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) has encountered 
significant obstacles in its efforts to carry-out is mandate 
as a watchdog of corruption.  Stalled legislation, lack of 
civic awareness, and a lack of understanding of the results 
of corruption combined with a weak political will, have all 
contributed to the problem.  While certain civil-society 
groups are attempting to push for appropriate corruption 
controls, the voice is weak and lacks the more compelling 
support of informed public consensus.  To reinvigorate past 
and ongoing efforts, and to build upon the opportunity for 
broad public debate which arises after national elections, 
the U.S. Mission would support a broad-based civic education 
drive.  Activities would focus on concrete examples of how 
corruption impacts the lives of ordinary people and stimulate 
involvement at the civic level, educating citizens about the 
need to combat corruption at all levels of government. 
 
The project would likely be implemented using an existing 
USAID central mechanism combined with an innovative approach. 
In concert with Transparency International, this project 
would engage civic leaders, government officials, and local 
advocacy groups. 
 
Estimated cost: $300,000 
 
MPP linkage:  Control of corruption is a key element in 
strengthening democratic institutions in Malawi.  In goal 
paper 2, Democratic System and Practices, the second 
performance indicator measures success with Transparency 
International's Corruption Perception Index.  This project 
would likely improve Malawi's standing on this index, pushing 
the country closer to Millennium Challenge Account 
eligibility. 
 
 
BROWNING