This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 000294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL OPDC AMGT KU
SUBJECT: (SBU) MFA REVIEWS RECIPROCITY 
 
Classified By: CDA FRANK URBANCIC; REASON:  1.4 (B, D) 
 
¶1.   (SBU)  Post has received the following diplomatic note 
(in Arabic; informal translation by Post): 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Department of Protocol 
 
Top Urgent 
Circular 
 
50003 
January 18, 2004 
 
MFA - Protocol Department - sends its compliments to all the 
diplomatic missions accredited to Kuwait. 
 
With reference to what was raised by Their Excellencies heads 
of our missions abroad during the fourth conference of heads 
of diplomatic missions abroad during the period from January 
5 to 7, 2004 on the enforcement of the principle of 
reciprocity on some issues with the missions accredited to 
the State of Kuwait in a number of protocol related 
procedures. 
 
Please provide us with the visions and insights of the 
esteemed mission on this issue, with reference to the 
following: 
 
1-   What are the systems allowed at the accredited mission 
regarding the use of the head of mission and official 
delegations of the VVIP lounge of the airport? 
 
2-   What is the highest level of an official whether in the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs or in other ministries the 
Kuwaiti Ambassador is allowed to meet with upon expressing 
desire of so, and the time needed to get the appointment 
fixed? 
 
3-   What is the level of response to invitation by the 
officials to mark the National Day and other official 
occasions, particularly the official level of the 
representation of the government to extend congratulations on 
the National Day? 
 
4-   What are the other issues the mission finds worthy of 
enforcement of reciprocity, such as airport entry passes, 
number of servants in the residence, diplomatic license 
plates for the mission and its members, level of security 
measures for the mission, etc. 
 
(complimentary closing). 
END TEXT. 
 
¶2.   (C)  COMMENT:  For the moment, we pass this to the 
Department for informational purposes only.  We are not 
anxious to engage in a reciprocity exercise with the GOK now 
because in many cases, the relationship is heavily 
asymmetrical in favor of the U.S.  Thus, we plan to defer 
response for the time being, pending further discussion with 
our MFA counterparts, should they choose to press it. 
British DCM told Charge on January 26, 2004 that his embassy 
is also weighing whether direct answers to these questions 
are advisable in the current climate.  End Comment. 
URBANCIC