This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LAGOS 000147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/PDPA, AF/W, ECA/A/E/AF, IIP/G/AF 
ABUJA CHARGE, ADCM, CPAO Acting, CAO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL NI
SUBJECT:  DYNAMIC MLK DAY EVENT DRAWS 250 IN LAGOS 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  The Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (MLK) 
celebration in Lagos, Nigeria, drew over 250 people as 
well as local press to share an evening of speeches, 
artwork and music in commemoration of the late civil 
rights leader. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) The program, which featured U.S. speaker Dr. 
Walter E. Fluker, focused on the theme of 'successes' 
and the application of legal civil rights victories in 
today's society.  These victories included the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, 
reflections on Brown v. the Board of Education 1954 
(Topeka, KS), as well as civil actions that supported 
the passage of these landmark public policy victories. 
 
¶3. (U) Dr. Fluker, who delivered a powerful speech on 
the need for moral leadership in developing society, 
was interrupted several times by applause as he drew a 
nexus between Nigeria's drive for civil rights and the 
struggle for equality in the United States.  Other 
notable speakers included the Charg  for the U.S. 
Mission to Nigeria, Rick L. Roberts and Lagos Consul 
General Robyn Hinson-Jones. 
 
¶4. (U) Upon entering the event, guests viewed a paper 
show highlighting prominent African-Americans.   The 
paper show featured Dr. King - as guests celebrated his 
legacy on the eve of the 75th Anniversary of his birth. 
 
¶5. (U) As the program commenced, we played audio 
vignettes of famous Dr. King speeches culminating in 
his passionate 'mountaintop' address shortly before his 
assassination.  Guests, including international 
diplomats, Lagos business and political leaders, U.S. 
Consulate General personnel, local school 
administrators and the local media, later remarked on 
the effectiveness of this technique as an attention 
grabbing method to start the program. 
 
¶6. (U) In an effort to support the local arts and bring 
a new dynamic to the MLK Day celebration, the U.S. 
Consulate General, Lagos, commissioned a string art 
portrait of Dr. King which was officially unveiled at 
the start of the program.  The 4x4 piece of artwork, 
which garnered positive feedback from the audience, 
will be housed at the Lagos Public Affairs section but 
will also be utilized as part of African American 
History Month planning and programs. 
 
¶7. (U) Other program highlights included the appearance 
of well-known Nigerian Jazz singer Yinka Davies, who 
performed a rousing rendition of "This Little Light of 
Mine' for the event.   In addition to Davies, a local 
accapella group called The Pillars performed 'We Shall 
Overcome" in English, Housa, Yoruba and Igbo. 
 
¶8. (U) At the conclusion of the program, guests were 
invited to socialize on the lawn of the Consul 
General's residence, where refreshments were served. 
 
¶9. (U) New to this year's program was the distribution 
of event evaluation forms.  Over 70 guests (almost 30 
percent of the total) completed all or part of the 
forms that will be used as a measuring tool to measure 
our effectiveness.  Additionally, the forms will enable 
more in-depth reporting to the Department of State on 
the effectiveness of Public Diplomacy Programming in 
Nigeria. 
 
¶10. (U) Result: Outstanding.  While press reports and 
assessment of media coverage is ongoing, this event was 
warmly received by those who attended.  The 
presentations and speeches were strengthened by the 
powerful oratory of Dr. Walter E. Fluker, who expressed 
his interest to the Cultural Affairs Officer in 
returning to Nigeria at a future date.  Guests were 
provided with new info-packs about Dr. King and the 
U.S. Civil Rights movement as they exited the venue, 
and those who took time to complete the event 
evaluation form also received a copy of Dr. King's 
famous "American Dream" speech. 
 
HINSON-JONES