This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  CARACAS 000294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
STATE PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OTI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2014 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM VE
SUBJECT: DAS DESHAZO MEETING WITH FOREIGN MINISTER CHADERTON 
 
REF: CARACAS 176 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Abelardo A. Arias for Reasons 1.4(b) 
 and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) On January 22, WHA DAS Peter DeShazo and Ambassador 
met with Foreign Minister Roy Chaderton.  In addition to the 
Venezuelan recall referendum process, they discussed: 
DeShazo's speech to the Venezuelan American Chamber of 
Commerce, recent comments by USG officials regarding 
Venezuela, GOV-Cuban relations, GOV relations with FARC, the 
two Venezuelan National Guard lieutenants who have requested 
asylum in the US, and the Inter-American Convention Against 
Terrorism.  Chaderton assured DeShazo that a constitutional 
process would be followed with the referendum and provided 
standard GOV responses on other issues.  Chaderton was 
accompanied by MFA Chief of Staff Rene Arreaza and US Deskoff 
Rebeca Guevara; DeShazo by the Ambassador and Poloff.  End 
summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
The Big Issue - The Referendum 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (C) DeShazo noted that there is great interest in 
Washington in the referendum process.  Washington is 
following the verification process closely and understands 
that the CNE is proceeding well in this technical period. 
Chaderton immediately made reference to the international 
observers and their constructive role.  DeShazo agreed with 
Chaderton, and said that a peaceful, constitutional outcome 
through the implementation of OAS resolution 833 is the goal 
of the USG and the international community.  Chaderton 
responded that a constitutional process will be followed, 
saying that if enough signatures were collected, there will 
be a referendum. 
 
---------------------------------- 
More GOV Reactions to USG Comments 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Weaved into the discussion on the referendum, 
Chaderton managed to make reference to USG comments by 
President Bush, the Secretary, Special Envoy Otto Reich, the 
Deputy Department Spokesman, WHA A/S Roger Noriega, and 
National Security Advisor Rice.  Chaderton found Bush to be 
"well spoken" at the Monterrey Summit and also agreed with 
the basic points that Secretary Powell has made regarding the 
referendum.  Chaderton called comments by Reich 
inappropriate.  He acknowledged that President Chavez's 
comments about Rice were "very tough," but offered no apology 
(see reftel).  After listing her academic achievements, 
Chaderton asserted that Rice does not understand the 
situation in Venezuela.  Chaderton also said that what 
worries the GOV is that USG comments are biased toward the 
opposition.  DeShazo rejected Chavez's comments about Dr. 
Rice as an inappropriate personal attack. 
 
------------ 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
¶4. (C) VenAmCham speech - Early in the meeting, Chaderton 
said the VenAmCham is becoming a politicized, Anti-Chavez 
organization, reserving special venom for the outgoing 
Venamcham President Andres Mata, owner of the Caracas 
newspaper "El Universal."  DeShazo noted his personal 
friendship with Mata and support for Venamcham. 
 
¶5. (C) GOV-FARC relations - DeShazo repeated the comments he 
made to Chaderton in December about the need for Venezuela to 
be vigilant against terrorism, especially regarding the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).  Chaderton 
indicated that the GOV relationship with Colombia was 
 
delicate.  In addition, he referenced the recent killing of 7 
GOV National Guard members allegedly by Colombian 
paramilitary group AUC. 
 
¶6. (C) GOV-GOC relations - Responding to DeShazo's expression 
of USG concern about GOV-Cuban relations, which he had also 
raised with Chaderton in December, the Foreign Minister 
complained that US policy caters to the Cuban-American 
community in Miami and lamented that the embargo harms the 
Cuban people. He defended the presence of Cuban doctors in 
Venezuela, claiming that other countries (Guatemala) allow 
them in without US complaint. 
 
¶7. (C) GOV National Guard asylees - Chaderton broached the 
issue of the two GOV National Guard lieutenants, who the GOV 
claims are linked to two embassy bombings, seeking asylum in 
the U.S.  DeShazo indicated that there are legal processes 
that must be followed and assured Chaderton that any decision 
on extradition would be in keeping with pertinent legal 
requirements and procedures. 
 
¶8. (C) Inter-American Convention Against Terrorism (IACT) - 
Chaderton inquired about the status of the IACT in the USG. 
DeShazo explained that it is before the Senate.  He 
emphasized the administration's interest in ratification and 
the importance of coordinated action against terrorism in the 
Americas. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (C) In general, Chaderton appeared to be following strict 
guidelines on talking points, particularly when inquiring 
about the GOV National Guard officials seeking asylum in the 
U.S. and in defending Chavez's comments about USG officials. 
He was much harsher in his comments than was VP Rangel in the 
subsequent meeting. 
 
¶10. (U) DAS DeShazo reviewed this message. 
SHAPIRO 
 
 
NNNN