This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000276 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE ALSO PASS TO USTR PATRICK COLEMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KCOR ETRD KDEM NI
SUBJECT: "CUSTOMS DUTY" HITS THE SMALL SCREEN 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 235 
 
     ¶B. LAGOS 309 
 
¶1. President Obasanjo announced in January that he was 
revamping the Nigeria Customs Service (NCS) because it was 
thoroughly corrupt and neither collecting proper duties not 
keeping out items the President had banned from importation 
(reftels).  The NCS Controller General was sacked along with 
several other senior officers.  A "new" NCS is emerging, and 
it now has its own TV news show, "CustomsDuty" at 10pm each 
Monday. 
 
¶2.  This week's half-hour show was not badly done.  The first 
story was a stakeholders meeting of Finance Minister Ngozi, 
representatives of shipping companies, the ports authorities 
and NCS working out new procedures for clearing shipments, 
and Ngozi told the audience she hoped all Nigerians would 
watch "CustomsDuty" each week.  The second story was on a 
World Customs Association training program for NCS personnel, 
supported by USAID.  A third story refuted accusations in the 
press that four seized containerloads of drugs had been 
auctioned off by the NCS as auto parts, but the fourth story 
reported the suspension of nine NCS officers for diverting 
and selling four tankers of vegoil that were supposed to be 
transshipped to Niger. 
 
¶3.  The show then turned to interaction with viewers.  Acting 
Controller General Ogungbemile started with a press 
conference, pushing for a "Strong emphasis on plugging 
revenue leakages" in the NCS.  While he spoke and answered 
questions from the audience, the show's e-mail address 
flashed across the bottom of the screen with encouragement 
for viewers to e-mail questions that would be answered on the 
show.  The last 5 minutes of the show then turned to the 
uniformed NCS presenter of the show answering the questions, 
ranging from defining what "commercial quantities" of an item 
are compared to amounts "for personal use" to a rather 
in-depth explanation for those who want to import items like 
orange juice on the banned list. 
 
¶4.  COMMENT: If NCS administered the ban on imported orange 
juice over the last several months as well it did the TV 
show, one would not find more imported orange juice than 
domestic on the shelves of most grocery stores in Abuja. 
While we of course are working the GON to overturn the bans, 
it should be noted that most items on the banned list have 
been entering anyway by Nigerian importers paying a bribe to 
customs officers that was less than the tariff before the 
ban.  Few U.S. companies have complained (Ref B) that their 
sales in Nigeria have decreased after the bans, perhaps for 
this reason. 
ROBERTS