This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  CARACAS 000291 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR WHA/AND 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
USCINCSO FOR POLAD 
USAID DCHA/OTI FOR RUSSELL PORTER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/23/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PREL VE
SUBJECT: DAS DESHAZO'S MEETING WITH CNE PRESIDENT 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Charles S. Shapiro for reasons 1.4(b) and (d) 
. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) WHA DAS Peter DeShazo and the Ambassador discussed the 
verification process for the recall referendum with National 
Electoral Council (CNE) President Francisco Carrasquero and 
CNE Secretary General William Pacheco January 22. 
Carrasquero assured DeShazo that the process is on track to 
be completed on or about February 15.  He described 
additional resources and guarantees of support the CNE has 
received from the GOV.  Carrasquero dismissed allegations of 
"mega-fraud".  He clarified several procedural details and 
outlined a timeline for the steps necessary to the 
verification process.  He dismissed concerns about delays and 
the CNE's ability to maintain its autonomy.  He expressed 
appreciation for international support and emphasized his 
belief that things will continue to go well.  End summary. 
 
--------------------- 
NO REASON FOR CONCERN 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Deputy Assistant Secretary DeShazo, Ambassador, DCM, 
and econoff spoke with National Electoral Council (CNE) 
President Francisco Carrasquero and CNE Secretary General 
William Pacheco about the referendum signature verification 
process on January 22. DeShazo opened the conversation by 
noting that all international eyes are upon Venezuela and 
that the center of attention is the CNE, stressing the 
historic importance that the CNE's management of the 
verification process--and beyond-- will have.  Carrasquero 
assured DeShazo and the Ambassador that the CNE would be able 
to complete the verification process by the constitutionally 
mandated deadline of February 15.  He said the GOV had 
offered more staff and computers, as well as a guarantee from 
Vice President Rangel of credits for the purchase of 
equipment.  The CNE now has three teams working 24 hours 
every day on the verification of signatures.  Carrasquero 
also noted that VP Rangel had visited him that day (note: as 
Rangel had told DeShazo he would) and had stated publicly 
that the GOV would respect whatever decision the CNE made. 
 
¶3. (C) Carrasquero was not worried by recent criticism of the 
CNE or by accusations of deliberate delays, but he did 
express concern that certain sectors of society would not 
respect the CNE's final decision.  He insisted the 
institution would maintain its independence and continue to 
work in a calm and transparent manner.  Carrasquero agreed 
with DeShazo's positive assessment of the international 
observers' role in maintaining transparency.  Although the 
teams had found a "normal" number of errors, Carrasquero said 
there was no sign yet of fraud.  He deemed it too early to 
make a meaningful determination on the 
issue. 
 
---------------------------- 
TIMING AND TECHNICAL DETAILS 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) DeShazo questioned Carrasquero on the details and 
timing of several steps integral to the verification process. 
 Carrasquero confirmed that CNE teams were engaged in the 
separate processes of physically verifying the tally 
sheets/certifications ("actas") and the signature sheets 
("planillas").  Once the physical verification is complete, 
the quality control process of cross-checking rejected 
signatures with existing electoral data can begin. 
Carrasquero said the CNE would publish a list of rejected 
signatures and a list of valid signatures in the national 
press for review by the public.  He explained that citizens 
would have a period of five days to dispute their inclusion 
on either list and could do so at regional CNE offices. 
According to Carrasquero, the dispute period will occur 
before February 13 when the final verification report will be 
submitted to CNE board.  The board will have two days to 
approve the report.  Carrasquero assured DeShazo that the 
 
board would make a definitive decision and publish the 
results of the signature drive in the electoral gazette on 
February 15. 
 
¶5. (C) CNE Secretary General William Pacheco told DeShazo 
that each subject and author of a particular recall effort 
would have the opportunity to audit the process.  He 
explained that either party could ask for copies of relevant 
certification sheets and signature sheets to be certain that 
CNE teams were operating with unaltered information.  Pacheco 
said copies of signature sheets had already been delivered to 
several National Assembly members up for recall. 
 
--------------------- 
AFTER FEBRUARY 15... 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Carrasquero noted that the CNE's final decision on the 
verification process would be open to Supreme Court 
challenges for an unspecified time period after its 
announcement.  Also, he and Pacheco guaranteed the CNE's 
technical ability to mount the various referenda within the 
legal time-frame if warranted by the results of the 
verification process.  Carrasquero told DAS DeShazo the board 
had already consulted with Spanish company, INDRA, about the 
technical requirements.  DeShazo congratulated Carrasquero on 
his work so far and reiterated the USG's support for a 
democratic, constitutional, electoral, and peaceful solution 
to Venezuela's political crisis. 
 
¶7. (C) The Ambassador asked Carrasquero about President 
Chavez' allegations of "mega-fraud".  Carrasquero said that 
the CNE hadn't finished its work, but that there was no 
mega-fraud.  He pointedly repeated his December 2002 public 
statement to the effect that the President's views on the 
validity of votes was not important in the CNE's autonomous 
verification process.  DeShazo praised Carrasquero's 
commitment to resisting political pressure, and emphasized 
the importance of institutional independence and transparency 
for the CNE's eventual decision to be seen as legitimate. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Carrasquero was upbeat and cordial.  As critics on 
both sides of the political spectrum currently beset the CNE, 
it behooves Carrasquero not to display any uncertainty about 
its capabilities.  However, the presidential recall 
referendum is a process of unprecedented technical and 
political complexity.  Despite Carrasquero's confident 
insistence that the CNE will meet its February 13th deadline, 
the date could slip.  Between those in the CNE who may 
attempt to slow the process, and the technical difficulties 
imposed by the scope of work, delays will be hard to avoid. 
 
¶9. (U) DAS DeShazo reviewed this message. 
SHAPIRO 
 
 
NNNN