This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L MADRID 000607 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2014 
TAGS: PREL SP EUN
SUBJECT: SPANISH RESPONSE TO DEMARCHES ON FEBRUARY 23-24 EU 
FMS MEETING 
 
REF: A. STATE 34712 
 
     ¶B. STATE 35969 
 
Classified By: Colin Cleary, Deputy Political Counselor, for Reasons 1. 
4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) We delivered reftel demarches on February 20 to 
Enrique Mora, Director of the MFA's Office of EU Foreign 
Policy and Common Security. 
 
¶2. (C) Regarding reftel A topics, Mora stated that the 
discussion on Afghanistan will include the EU's concern that 
the references to Islam in the Afghan constitution are 
"dangerous in the medium-term".  On funding, he said that 
there were no plans for the GOS to increase its current 
financial commitments in Afghanistan.  Mora added that he did 
not know of any interest to renegotiate the Bonn Accord, and 
that the topic was not on the agenda. 
 
¶3. (C) Mora said the group would hear reports from Javier 
Solana on Pakistan-India and on SFOR operations in the 
Balkans.  While he said that economic assistance to Pakistan 
was not on the agenda, Mora stated that it was Spain's 
opinion that Pakistan was a state that needed meet its 
nonproliferation responsibilities before aid could increase. 
 
¶4. (C) On reftel B themes, Mora stated that he thought 
discussions would center on reasserting the EU's previous 
positions towards Russia regarding the accession of the new 
EU member states in May.  He said that Russia has been 
pressing the EU to have some of the new member states 
continue to honor preferential bilateral trade deals with 
Russia, even if they violate existing EU laws and treaties. 
Mora said that this was a non-starter with EU members, and 
that he expected them to forcefully reiterate this point. 
While he said that Spain shares USG concerns on democracy in 
Russia, he did not know if the theme would be addressed at 
this meeting. 
MANZANARES