This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 AMMAN 000652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E STAFF FOR CADE 
TREASURY FOR OASIA -- A. DEMOPULOS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/26/2009 
TAGS: EFIN PGOV EAID PREL JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN PM PLEDGES CONTROVERSIAL TAX AND PRICE 
HIKES; PARLIAMENT CRIES FOUL 
 
REF: AMMAN 72 
 
Classified By: David Hale, CDA.  Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary.  With unusual candor, Prime Minister Faisal 
al-Fayez publicly announced oil product price and tax hikes 
to take effect later this year.  Although Fayez softened the 
blow by announcing public pay increases and blaming previous 
governments and external forces, his political honeymoon is 
probably at an end:  he will likely be subjected to 
increasing criticism in Parliament and publicly as the annual 
budget debate begins.  While we expect the tax and price 
hikes to go through, the government's victory will come at 
the expense of its popularity, particularly given a public 
mood of impatience with economic reform and austerity.  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
PM PROPOSES TAX, PRICE INCREASES 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  In a January 19 speech to a special meeting of 
Parliament's lower house, Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez went 
public with the tax and price hikes contained in the 
government's 2004 draft budget (see para 9).  With frankness 
unusual in Jordanian politics, Faisal made it clear that -- 
as committed to the United States and the IMF -- Jordan would 
increase petroleum product prices and the sales tax base and 
rate in order to help maintain the 2004 fiscal deficit at the 
equivalent of 3.9% of GDP.  The speech, and the negative 
reaction to it inside and outside of Parliament, may mark the 
beginning of the end of the political honeymoon Fayez has 
enjoyed since October and the beginning of an increasingly 
contentious debate over economic policy, including 
privatizations and other reforms. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The Prime Minister's remarks brought closer to a 
boil the simmering debate over the distribution of economic 
wealth and gains in a society still burdened by high poverty 
and unemployment.  Economic reforms sponsored by King 
Abdullah have been slow in making a tangible difference in 
the daily lives of most Jordanians, who have lived with 
austerity since the deep financial crisis of 1989.  Thus, the 
PM faces the political challenge of convincing a skeptical 
society that continuing sacrifices will eventually pay off. 
Convincing Parliament -- which over-represents "traditional" 
constituencies that have historically relied on government 
handouts, contracts and jobs -- is even tougher. 
 
¶4.  (C)  While open about the planned fiscal measures as 
being "in the best interest of the country," the PM softened 
the blow by promising modest increases in government salaries 
($14 for those earning less than $280 per month, and $7 per 
month for those earning between $280 and $420).  In addition, 
he said that increases would be phased-in over the first half 
of the year "in accordance with the King's directives" (but 
as already planned in the budget, see ref).  In an effort to 
share responsibility, Fayez portrayed this phasing as a 
softening of "previous governments' commitments to 
international aid agencies and donors."  (Earlier in the 
speech he had also made the backhanded suggestion that the 
measures had been imposed from outside, averring, "These 
measures are not dictated, as some may think, by 
international monetary organizations.") 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
PARLIAMENT SAYS "NO" IN PUBLIC, "MAYBE" IN PRIVATE 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Fayez' effort to soften the blow fell flat in 
Parliament and with the public.  Out of 67 of lower house 
members attending the special meeting, 45 voted in favor of a 
non-binding "sense of the house" resolution against the new 
measures.  Members' speeches and public commentary almost 
uniformly fell back on populist rhetoric and condemned the 
measures as impositions on the poor, although some said they 
would accept higher taxes on "luxury goods."  Most, like the 
chairman of the Finance Committee, attributed the increases 
to "foreign pressure." 
 
¶6.  (C)  Populist MP Mumdouh Abbadi, leader of a 
parliamentary bloc of eleven votes, publicly threatened that 
his bloc would vote against the budget if the price and tax 
increases went into effect.  Abbadi told PolCouns that 
neither the PM nor government ministers had consulted with 
MPs to prepare them for the price and tax hike announcement. 
By presenting the hikes in front of the Parliament, Abbadi 
argued, Fayez "tried to shift blame on us (MPs)."  (He 
asserted that the government had not even previewed the PM's 
speech with Lower House Speaker Abd ul-Hadi Majali.)  This 
"forced" Abbadi to threaten to vote against the budget "to 
show the people that we understand their problems."  Abbadi 
said his threat was also intended to get the government to 
"deal with us" on the specifics of price and tax hikes.  In 
the final analysis, Abbadi concluded, MPs understand the poor 
financial state of the GOJ and "if the government is willing 
to talk to us and compromise," it will get what it needs. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  The PM's approach was in keeping with his emphasis 
on transparency and consultation, and his briefing was in 
response to a request from Islamist MPs for a presentation 
from the PM on the budget.  If he wished to maintain his 
credibility, Fayez had no choice but to provide an honest 
account.  As he told the Ambassador moments before his 
appearance in Parliament, Fayez was well aware that his 
popularity would suffer -- and outcome he far from relished. 
 
¶8.  (C)  The 2004 budget debate, behind schedule but set to 
begin in the full house the week of February 8, will contain 
the promised rhetorical fireworks.  While we remain certain 
that the government and King are committed to the fiscal 
measures Fayez described, it will not be easy days for them. 
Even supporters of fiscal rectitude are critical of how the 
government is handling the issue politically.  A former 
finance minister, for instance, told the Ambassador that the 
government was "stupid" to spark a debate at this juncture 
and then seek to pass off responsibility to "previous 
governments" and the King.  Private criticism from MPs has 
focused not on the price/tax hikes themselves, but on the 
feeling that the GOJ sprang the topic on them without warning 
or consultation.  (While in fact, Fayez was responding to 
MP's demands for a briefing on the budget -- they were 
perhaps unaccustomed to a frank account from a sitting PM.) 
¶9.  (C)  On the other hand, the PM's transparency will give 
the public and Parliament several months to get used to the 
idea before the increases transpire, thereby hopefully 
avoiding the public demonstrations the government dreads.  In 
addition, Fayez may have built some room for "negotiation" 
into his speech: he said the basic sales tax rate would 
increase to 16%, while the Finance Minister had earlier told 
us that he was planning on an increase to 15% (ref). 
Nonetheless, it is worth recalling that the politics of 
economic reform in Jordan are far from easy:  the King and 
his government are taking real risks for the policies he (and 
we) support. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  Note:  Fiscal Measures mentioned by Fayez: 
 
-- 9% Average increase in consumer prices in fuel products, 
including: 
 
   -- Increase in butane gas from 3 JD to 3.5 JD/cylinder. 
 
   -- Increase in price per liter of super gasoline from 
        JD0.300 to JD0.325. 
 
   -- Increase in price per liter of regular gasoline from 
        JD0.350 to JD0.375. 
 
   -- Increase in price per liter of diesel from JD 0.350 
        to JD 0.375 
 
   -- Increase in price per liter of kerosene from JD 0.350 
        to JD 0.375 
 
-- Increase in basic General Sales Tax (GST) rate from 13% to 
16%. 
 
-- Increase in lower GST rate (for food, clothing and other 
basic 
   consumables) from 4% to 6%.   Also, some items would be 
moved 
   from the lower GST rate to the higher rate. 
 
-- Imposition of 6% sales tax on alcohol and tobacco products. 
 
-- Monthly pay increase of JD10 for civil servants earning 
less 
   than JD200 per month. 
 
-- Monthly pay increase of JD5 for civil servants earning 
between 
   JD200 and JD300 per month. 
-- Increase in coverage of National Aid Fund (which provides 
   income assistance to those below poverty line). 
HALE