This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001497 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR R - TUTWILER 
E STAFF FOR DAYNA CADE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON KPAO JO
SUBJECT: U/S LARSON MEETS YOUNG JORDANIAN PROFESSIONALS 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs 
Alan Larson met on Tuesday, February 24, with a group of 
dynamic young Jordanian professionals and university 
students in a roundtable discussion.  Following 
introductory remarks by Larson, participants raised a 
variety of concern that mainly focused on future 
prospects for young professionals and entrepreneurs in 
Jordan and the region and how the US policy could improve 
those prospects.  Issues of concern to the group were the 
persistent political risk in the region as a hurdle to 
investment and Jordan's need for more training assistance 
as opposed -- the group thought -- to financial 
assistance.  Some of the participants expressed their 
view that Jordan's and the region's policies and 
economies needed to reform and grow in order to 
accommodate the fast growing and very young population. 
They concurred with Larson that Jordan's biggest asset is 
its people; yet, as one participant pointed out, the 
prospects for a young population could also be negative 
if the economy is not able to accommodate and utilize 
their energy. 
 
¶3.  (U)  The meeting concluded with a positive feeling 
that the future is bright for the region and that Jordan 
is positioned to capitalize on the many opportunities for 
business and trade creation in the region and with the 
U.S.  They hoped an improved investment climate would 
attract socially conscious multinational companies. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Comment:  The group was made up of members of 
the Rotaract Clubs of Jordan and the USAID-supported 
Young Entrepreneurs Association.  Background on these 
organizations follows.  The give and take format of the 
meeting was a very effective tool for reacting out to 
aspiring young professionals.  In future such events, we 
would seek to arrange for press coverage in order to 
multiply the public impact. 
 
--  The Young Entrepreneurs Association was established 
in November 1998 as a non-profit organization with the 
mission of creating outstanding young entrepreneurs 
through idea exchange, fellowship, education, training 
and advocacy, to enhance entrepreneurs' skill level 
allowing them to compete in the global economy.  YEA 
receives support from several agencies, including USAID. 
Some of YEA projects and services include: The Annual 
Entrepreneurship Forum (next round July 2004); Jordan 
Vision 2020; the Education Policy Paper Mentoring 
Program; Tomorrow's Entrepreneurs Program, and the Arab 
Forum for Young Entrepreneurs (AFYE). Web address: 
www.yea.com.jo 
 
--  Rotaract is part of the Rotary International family, 
Rotaract clubs are for young men and women ages 18 - 30, 
professionals or university students.  Rotaract is 
present in many countries throughout the world; in the 
region, Rotary District 2450 is made of Egypt, Jordan, 
Lebanon, Cyprus, Bahrain, Sudan and Dubai. Jordan has 
three Rotaract Clubs:  Rotaract Amman, Amman - 
Philadelphia and Amman - Petra. Among their numerous 
activities, the three clubs have hosted several events 
and activates with the American Embassy in Amman: a 
debate with the Council of American Moslems for 
Understanding (CAMU) in December 2002; a session on Youth 
Groups and the Internet in August 2003; and two events 
for visiting members of American Council of Young 
Political Leaders (ACYPL) in September 2003. Web address: 
www.rotaract2450.org. 
Gnehm