This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER, D. TEITELBAUM 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
DS/OP/AF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINR ASEC ZI MDC
SUBJECT: MDC PLANNING TO SUPPORT NON-MDC MASS ACTION 
 
REF: A. HARARE 47 
     ¶B. 2003 HARARE 2455 
     ¶C. 2003 HARARE 2443 
     ¶D. 2003 HARARE 2412 
     ¶E. 2003 HARARE 2313 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: An MDC official described plans for a prayer 
vigil on January 11 as the first in what the MDC hopes will 
be a series of similar (mass) actions in the coming weeks or 
months.  The events would be held under the auspices of the 
church rather than the MDC.  The official recounted MDC 
efforts to build its structures in rural areas, and also 
revealed that some in the MDC leadership would be content if 
the ruling party candidate won the upcoming parliamentary 
by-election in Gutu-North.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Prayer Vigils in Lieu of Mass Action 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (C) In a conversation with poloff on January 8, Dennis 
Murira, MDC mass action coordinator, and personal assistant 
to MDC Party Chairman Isaac Matongo, said that plans were 
underway to hold a prayer vigil on January 11 in Kambuzuma, a 
high-density suburb of Harare.  Murira and Gandi Mudzingwa, 
MDC Special Assistant for Presidential Affairs, have in 
recent months both described MDC plans to begin holding 
prayer vigils early in the new year with the hope that the 
GOZ would be reluctant to crack down on church-goers (Ref D). 
 The events would appear to be church-sponsored, but MDC 
structures would be used to generate attendance that Murira 
suggested could be 2-500 people for the January 11 event. 
Murira said MDC leaders hoped to demonstrate that the MDC was 
still a relevant political force and to generate confidence 
among the party faithful ahead of the 2005 parliamentary 
elections.  Murira said stickers already had been printed 
which said "faith demands action". 
 
Building Rural Support in Key Constituencies 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Echoing other MDC officials, Murira reiterated that 
the party was focused on building its support base in rural 
areas.  The party would concentrate door-to-door membership 
campaigns in 30 pilot constituencies that they had only lost 
narrowly in the 2000 and 2002 elections.  Murira said the 
party had sold thousands of membership cards (signing up 
thousands of new members) in the selected areas.  He said the 
upcoming challenge would be to get old and new members to 
register to vote as soon as the GOZ opened the voter's rolls 
for the 2005 elections. 
 
MDC Support for ZANU-PF Candidate ? 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Murira, who is from the Masvingo area, admitted that 
much of the MDC leadership would quietly be happy if ZANU-PF 
candidate for the February 2-3 parliamentary by-election in 
Gutu North (near Masvingo) Josiah Tungamirai won.  He said 
that this message was of course not being communicated 
publicly, but that the MDC had communicated in the past with 
retired Air Chief Marshal Tungamirai in an effort to bolster 
its ties and confidence with the military.  Murira said MDC 
leaders were comfortable with Tungamirai.  (Note: MDC public 
support for Tungamirai would likely have led to serious 
problems for the candidate from within ZANU-PF.  End Note.) 
Murira said that the MDC was short on cash and, acknowledging 
that they were likely to lose anyway, might only send Z$3 
million (US$460) to its candidate Crispa Musoni for the 
campaign in Gutu North, a traditionally ZANU-PF bastion. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Murira's description of MDC plans for mass action, or 
more clearly plans not to undertake mass action in its own 
name but rather coordinate discreetly with other civic or 
religious organizations, is consistent with the direction 
laid out during last month's party conference (Ref B), and 
recent conversations with MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai and 
other MDC officials (Refs A, D).  From the MDC's perspective, 
the vigils area designed more to build confidence within the 
party faithful rather than to send a message to the GOZ or to 
motivate political change from the regime.  They will be an 
important test of the MDC's organizational capabilities, 
which the party has quietly been developing since last June's 
failed mass action.  The party probably will suffer little 
downside should the vigils fail to gather momentum.  If they 
succeed, the vigils may pose a dilemma for the GOZ, which is 
keen not to let the opposition gain credibility but wants to 
project an air of growing political calm.  Should the GOZ 
arrest organizers or take some other overt action against the 
vigils or organizers, the challenge will fall back to the MDC 
on how to exploit the situation. 
SULLIVAN