This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  BRATISLAVA 000191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ECON ELAB SOCI LO ECONOMIC REFORM
SUBJECT: SUPERMARKET RAIDS SPUR GOS TO FOCUS ON ROMA NEEDS 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Throughout February, Roma activists raised 
the alarm about coming changes in the welfare system and 
have called for national strikes.  Beginning February 18, 
organized groups of Roma have raided grocery stores, 
primarily in South-Eastern Slovakia to steal alcohol, 
cigarettes, and candy.  GOS officials and independent 
journalists have told emboffs that political campaigning in 
Roma settlements is responsible for tensions in the region. 
At the February 25 cabinet meeting, the GOS approved 12 
recommendations negotiated by Labor Minister Kanik and Roma 
leaders to assist Roma to obtain jobs and maximize social 
benefits.  End summary. 
 
Changes in the Social Benefit System 
------------------------------------ 
¶2. (U) One element of the government's sweeping economic 
reforms is cutting social benefits for some unemployed while 
providing incentives to seek jobs.  Recognizing the dearth 
of employment opportunities in parts of Slovakia, the 
central government allocated funds to municipalities, which 
in turn were supposed to create community service jobs. 
Unemployed individuals who performed such jobs would receive 
a "bonus" payment in their social benefits.  The new system 
of social benefits will take effect March 1.  Unfortunately 
the municipalities and local labor offices are still 
unprepared to implement the programs designed to take the 
bite out of the benefit cuts. 
 
¶3. (U) As word spread about the impending reductions in 
social benefits, many Roma communities became alarmed.  Roma 
will be particularly affected by the cuts, especially those 
in settlements, where unemployment can reach 100 percent. 
Most leaders, such as Government Plenipotentiary for Roma 
Klara Orgovanova, called for Roma to protest through legal 
means.  Others called for more radical measures. 
 
Looting in Eastern Slovakia 
--------------------------- 
¶4. (U) On February 18, eighty Roma looted a supermarket in 
Levoca in eastern Slovakia.  Local Roma residents claimed 
they needed to steal food for their families in light of the 
changes to the welfare system.  Grocery store looting spread 
to several other towns, with the latest tactic to send women 
and children, since police are reluctant to use force 
against them.  Store owners report that staples like bread 
and milk are not looted; alcohol, cigarettes, and candy 
disappear.  In the southeastern town of Trebisov February 
24, police believed several hundred Roma intended to loot a 
store, and they dispersed the group using high-pressure 
water hoses and tear gas. 
 
¶5. (U) The increasing violence has alarmed citizens of all 
ethnic groups.  The Association of Young Roma in Banska 
Bystrica warned that the store looting might grow into a 
national problem full of "xenophobia, brutality and hate." 
The Roma Council of Slovakia is cooperating with police to 
calm the social turmoil, and proposed creating a guard force 
involving Roma themselves. 
 
What is Really Behind the Violence? 
----------------------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) Initially, some press reports and government 
officials said that Roma usurers had organized the raiding 
parties out of fear they would lose income when benefits 
decrease.  Orgovanova told emboffs that usurers, while 
highly influential in Roma communities, were not the main 
cause of the looting and protests.  Rather, prominent Roma 
leaders and members of political parties are campaigning in 
Roma settlements against current GOS reforms, which has 
contributed to the escalation of tensions in the region. 
 
¶7. (SBU) A reporter for Roma newspaper Romano Lil, Denisa 
Havrlova, informed POL assistant that Roma from settlements 
and other friends from eastern Slovak villages have told her 
about communist party (KSS) members going around and 
instigating people to rebellion.  They argue that Roma were 
much better off during the former regime when they had 
enough to eat, they had jobs, and were taken care of.  Now 
they don't have any of this and so as soon as this 
government is out, a new government (including the KSS) may 
be able to help them much more effectively. 
 
¶8. (SBU) An MP from PM Dzurinda's SDKU party told P/E chief 
February 24 that the same forces behind organizing the April 
3 referendum on early elections--including the labor unions 
and SMER party--were behind the tumult in Roma communities. 
In addition, Jana Kviecinska, the Director of the Government 
Office for Human Rights, told POL assistant that she knows 
about communists, labor unionists and other political 
activists of the opposition visiting Roma and inciting them 
against the GOS.  They are urging Roma to participate in the 
 
April 3 referendum, by promising improvement of their 
situation after the fall of the Dzurinda government. 
 
Initial Government Action 
------------------------- 
¶9. (U) The GOS has reinforced security in eastern Slovakia 
with 2000 extra police and 1000 soldiers.  Prime Minister 
Dzurinda and Minister of Interior Palko traveled to Kosice 
February 24 for a first-hand view.  The same day, Minister 
for Labor and Social Affairs Kanik brainstormed with Roma 
leaders on ways to diffuse the situation. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Ladislav Richter, Chair of the Council of Roma 
NGO's, told POL assistant that Kanik and his staff were very 
forthcoming.  They agreed on twelve points to assist Roma to 
obtain jobs and maximize social benefits.  Most notably, 
Kanik accepted Richter's proposal that Roma NGO's, in 
addition to municipalities, be able to obtain government 
funding to create community service jobs.  In addition, the 
Roma leaders agreed with Kanik that in early March Richter 
will try to put together a session of Roma leaders from all 
over Slovakia to meet with economy ministers, Kanik, Palko 
and Dzurinda.  They hope to find some mechanism to resolve 
this crisis. 
 
Government Approves Labor Minister's Recommendations 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The cabinet held a February 25 meeting to decide 
how to react to the Roma concerns and avoid further 
violence, at which Kanik presented the "Twelve Points." 
Kviecinska, a long-time human rights activist, phoned POL 
assistant immediately after the meeting.  She was very happy 
with Dzurinda's leadership on the issue and the decisions 
reached by the GOS.  She said all the economic ministers 
were very well prepared for the session and were very 
constructive. The PM opened the meeting by saying, "This is 
the time for action and we have to get things done!" 
Kviecinska was very excited about the outcome. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The GOS approved the Twelve Points, including 
Richter's proposal to allow NGO's, organizations like Red 
Cross, and charities to assist Roma through creating 
community jobs.  Civil servants dealing with social issues 
will work closer to Roma; some of them will be administering 
services directly in settlements. Ministers were asked to 
find more job opportunities and subsidies for "persons with 
long-term unemployment," i.e. Roma.  The GOS also extended 
the age limit for practical training (which graduates from 
any type of school may use) to 25 years.  Employers receive 
state subsidies for each person they employ, and the 
apprenticeship time is calculated into retirement benefits. 
Kviecinska said this will help young Roma.  She added that 
many of these things could have been adopted before, "but 
there was no political will.  However, finally the GOS took 
real action!" (Comment: We understand these measures do not 
require parliamentary action.) 
 
¶13. (U) The Twelve Points (Note internal numbering) 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
1) Increase bonus for those in community service jobs from 
SKK 1,000 to 1,500, beginning in April or September 2004. 
 
2) Take preventive measures against usury: pay social 
benefits more often, in goods, monitored by the police in 
the worst-affected localities. 
 
3) Provide bonuses for organizers of larger "activation 
programs" (creating community service jobs for more than 100 
workers) including municipalities and NGOs. 
 
4) Motivate employers to hire long-term unemployed: 
government will pay for the training selected by the 
employer for up to 10,000 SKK 
 
5) Extend the age limit for the post-school practice period 
to 25 years; lengthen the period of the practice beyond 
current six months, increase the benefit from 1,000 to 1,500 
SK.  Community service work should be recognized as one of 
the forms of the practice. 
 
6) Apply all reform laws systematically.  Increase 
information of both unemployed and officials about the full 
range of possible social benefits, ensure all municipal 
offices are able to provide them. 
 
7) Increase social stipends for high school students, 
including transportation costs to and from the school. 
 
8) Assist elementary schools students by providing free 
meals, textbooks, and school supplies in areas with high 
 
unemployment.  Perhaps provide parents with transitory one 
time contribution for costs related with school attendance 
(shoes). 
 
9) Reconsider the price structure for utilities; set an 
existential minimum of utilities (a strictly limited package 
for a minimum price). 
 
10) Reimburse travel costs related to seeking a job. 
 
11) Take action against usury, by police and law enforcement 
agencies. 
 
12) Speed up the start of the Fund for Social Development, 
which will provide for community partnerships for social 
inclusion, and start programs specifically for the 
inhabitants of settlements. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶14. (SBU) It is too early to tell whether the government's 
"Twelve Points" will entirely calm the situation, but the 
GOS has surprised many by acting swiftly and decisively. 
With just over a month before the Presidential election and 
referendum on early elections, political interests are 
playing a leading role in the development of this social 
issue.  Emboffs will meet with Roma activists and local 
officials in eastern Slovakia February 26 and 27. 
 
THAYER 
 
 
NNNN