This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000895 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM GR TU
SUBJECT: U.S. ORTHODOX LEADERS DISCUSS HALKI, PATRIARCHATE 
WITH GOT 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador; reasons 1.5 b and d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: An eight-member delegation of the Archons of 
the Ecumenical Patriarchate, a New York-based Greek Orthodox 
group, met with three GOT ministers in Ankara and discussed 
the continued closure of the Halki Seminary and other 
problems confronting the Ecumenical Patriarchate.  The 
Archons and the Ambassador asserted that the Patriarchate 
will not survive in Turkey unless the problems are resolved. 
The Ministers said the GOT is seeking ways within Turkish law 
to open Halki and loosen other restrictions.  They said it 
would be easier for the GOT to improve relations with the 
Greek Orthodox community in Turkey if Greek authorities would 
loosen restrictions on the Turkish minority in Thrace.  The 
MFA tried to prevent Embassy from arranging Cabinet-level 
meetings for the Archons.  End Summary. 
 
 
------------------------------- 
Archons Hold Meetings, Luncheon 
------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (U) After spending three days in Istanbul, the Archons met 
in Ankara February 9 with Education Minister Celik, Interior 
Minister Aksu, and State Minister Aydin.  They also held a 
luncheon in honor of the Ambassador, attended by Turkish 
parliamentarians, scholars, journalists, and NGO 
representatives.  They received a plaque from an organization 
representing the spouses of police officers killed in the 
line of duty, in recognition of their USD 3,000 donation. 
 
 
--------------------------------- 
Survival of Patriarchate at Stake 
--------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (U) Anthony Limberakis, leader of the Archon delegation, 
told each of the ministers that the Archons are concerned 
about three issues:  1) The continued closure of the Halki 
seminary (the GOT shut down the seminary, on Heybeli Island 
in the Sea of Marmara, in 1971 when it nationalized all 
private institutions of higher learning); 2) restrictions on 
the right of the Patriarchate to acquire and own property; 
and 3) GOT interference in the Patriarchal succession process 
(the GOT requires that the Patriarch be a Turkish citizen). 
The Ambassador, who participated in the meetings,  said the 
survival of the Patriarchate in Istanbul is ultimately at 
stake.  Turkey's Greek Orthodox community has dwindled to 
about 2,500.  Under current conditions, the Patriarchate 
might have to be relocated in the near future, perhaps to 
Moscow.  This would not be in the interests of the U.S. or 
Turkey.  A number of U.S. senators and congressmen are 
concerned about this possibility. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
Options for Reopening Halki Discussed 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (U) The ministers all expressed support for the survival 
of the Patriarchate in Istanbul and the eventual reopening of 
Halki.  They said they are optimistic that the GOT and the 
Patriarchate will develop a more positive relationship. Aydin 
averred that the Patriarchate is a long-standing, historic 
Turkish institution that must be preserved.  Celik noted that 
Halki operated under Ottoman sultans, and said it was 
"unacceptable" that a modern, secular government is keeping 
it closed.   He said an ad hoc Education Ministry committee 
formed under his direction recently completed a study on how 
Halki could be reopened.  According to the study, the 
seminary could be reopened, 1) as a secondary school attached 
to the Education Ministry, like a number of existing Greek 
high schools; 2) as a faculty of a Turkish University; or 3) 
as a two-year high school attached to a foundation.  The 
study is being reviewed by other branches of the GOT.  These 
ideas are opposed by some elements of the Turkish State.  If 
the study wins broad support, the options will be presented 
to the Patriarchate.  However, if the Patriarchate continues 
to insist on having sole authority over Halki, it will be 
difficult to reopen the seminary.  Turkish law requires that 
all schools, public or private, be under Education Ministry 
authority.  If the GOT makes an exception for Halki, than all 
the Islamic groups will want independent high schools as 
well. 
 
 
-------------------------------------- 
GOT: Thracian Turks Also Face Problems 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (U) Each of the ministers indicated that it would be 
politically easier for the GOT to loosen restrictions on the 
Patriarchate if the Greek government and Orthodox Church 
would do the same for the Turkish minority in Greece.  They 
claimed Greece has not opened the mosque in Athens, and 
Turkish Muslims in Greek Thrace are not allowed to elect 
their mufti.  Reverend Karloutsos, assistant to U.S. 
Archbishop Demetrios, said the Archons met with the 
Archbishop of Athens in November and urged him to support 
greater religious freedom for the Turkish community in 
Greece.  However, Karloutsos argued, the two issues should 
not be linked directly -- the Greek Orthodox in Istanbul are 
Turkish citizens and their rights should not depend on the 
status of Turks in Greece. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
Comment - MFA Tries to Block Meetings 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Embassy had to work around the MFA to arrange 
Cabinet-level meetings for the Archons.  The MFA responded to 
our official request for meetings with FM Gul and other 
ministers by saying they were unavailable, and instead 
offering the acting director of the Directorate of Religious 
Affairs.  We arranged the Celik, Aksu, and Aydin meetings at 
the last minute through unofficial channels.  An MFA official 
attended the Aksu meeting, occasionally interjecting 
unhelpful comments into the conversation.  At one point, he 
told the Archons that the Turkish minority in Greece has 
"real problems," compared to the "minor" problems facing the 
Patriarchate in Istanbul.  Last year, the Archons' only 
Ankara meeting was with MFA Deputy U/S Ilkin; the Archons 
told us they did not want to meet with Ilkin again this year 
because he "humiliated" them last time. 
 
 
EDELMAN