This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  CARACAS 000312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
STATE PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OTI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2014 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM VE
SUBJECT: CARTER VISITS VENEZUELA TO OBSERVE REFERENDUM 
PROCESS 
 
 
Classified By: Mark Wells, Acting Political Counselor, for Reasons 1.4( 
b) and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) From January 25-27, former President Jimmy Carter 
visited Venezuela to observe the referendum process and meet 
with the National Election Commission (CNE), Organization of 
American States, the National Assembly (AN), the Supreme 
Court, the Group of Friend's ambassadors, business leaders, 
public and private media, opposition leaders, and President 
Chavez.  In press remarks, Carter said that he observed no 
evidence of fraud in the referendum process, and that the GOV 
did not make any allegations of "megafraud."  He also asked 
the private media to respect the CNE.  Carter requested, and 
obtained, CNE approval to extend OAS/Carter Center 
observation to critical parts of the CNE signature 
verification process.  Carter indicated that he thought the 
CNE was working hard, but it would not meet its 30-day 
deadline (February 13) to verify the signatures, likely 
reporting its results by March 1.  Carter urged all parties 
to accept the results of a constitutional, legal, transparent 
CNE decision.  Chavez told Carter that he would respect any 
decision made by the CNE.  Carter, however, could not obtain 
the same commitment from all opposition leaders.  End summary. 
 
----------------- 
Carter's Schedule 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Carter arrived in Caracas on January 25 and the 
Ambassador accompanied him from the airport.  Later, Carter 
had dinner with Venezuelan business leaders.  On January 26, 
Carter met with the TSJ, AN deputies from opposition and 
pro-government parties, CNE leaders, opposition leaders, 
Carter Center personnel, OAS representatives, and President 
Chavez.  The Ambassador attended a dinner with the Group of 
Friends' ambassadors and Carter.  At dinner, Carter noted the 
CNE's hard work, but showed concern that the CNE is applying 
more stringent revision of the signatures for the 
presidential referendum than for the deputies.  He also said 
the CNE assured him that the presidential recall referendum 
would not be delayed past August 19.  On January 27, Carter 
met again with Chavez and met with more opposition leaders. 
Carter held a press conference in the afternoon. 
 
-------------------------- 
Accepting the CNE Decision 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) At the press conference, Carter stressed the need for 
all parties to accept the decision of the CNE if the process 
is considered constitutional, legal, and transparent.  Carter 
said that he received full access to the CNE.  He also said 
that the CNE has ensured international observers' access to 
all stages of the verification process.  Contrary to 
statements by Chavez that Carter was surprised by evidence of 
fraud by the opposition, Carter said that he was not/not 
surprised by anything he saw.  He said that Chavez presented 
two or three actas (tally sheets) with errors.  However, 
Carter emphasized, "I have not seen any evidence of fraud." 
To promote further transparency, Carter encouraged all five 
CNE leaders to give updates through daily press conferences. 
Pointing to the CNE's immense amount of work, Carter thought 
that the CNE would announce a decision regarding the validity 
of the signatures by March 1, missing the 30-day deadline of 
February 13. 
 
¶4. (U) Chavez said publicly that he had told Carter that he 
wants the referendum process to be "completely transparent" 
and that the government will accept any decision made by the 
CNE.  Meeting with Carter twice, Chavez offered support for 
complete access to the referendum process for Carter and 
international observers, saying that he has no problem with 
the OAS and Carter Center observing the entire referendum 
 
 
process.  Carter indicated that there is a difference of 
opinion within the opposition regarding the acceptance of any 
CNE decision.  Some opposition leaders assured him that they 
would accept any CNE decision, but others did not. 
Regardless of the CNE's decision, Carter pledged his personal 
and the Carter Center,s support to Venezuela. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5. (C) Carter's visit was welcome and timely, coming at a 
period of tension as the CNE struggles to complete its 
mandate.  Carter is clearly respected by all parties, who 
view him as impartial and honest.  His comments about not 
seeing fraud (on either side) helped refocus the CNE on its 
overwhelming task of verifying millions of signatures. 
Specific accomplishments were Chavez's public message that he 
would respect the CNE,s decision on the referendum; an 
absence of GOV/Chavista public claims of "megafraud," more 
private media tolerance/respect for the CNE; and the CNE's 
decision to allow wider OAS/Carter Center observation of the 
signature verification process.  Where Carter came up a 
little short was with the opposition, which at least as a 
group was unwilling to respect any CNE decision that was 
"constitutional, legal, and transparent." 
SHAPIRO 
 
 
NNNN