This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 000340 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/16/2014 
TAGS: PREL PTER SY TU
SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER AKSU ON ANTI-TERROR COOPERATION 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador Eric S. Edelman; reasons 1.5 (b) and 
(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In Jan. 16 meeting with Interior Minister 
Aksu, Ambassador highlighted USG interest in strengthening 
counter terrorism cooperation and intelligence sharing with 
the GOT.  Aksu asserted CT relations with Syria are 
improving, committed to instituting passenger and baggage 
checks to address airport security loopholes, and updated the 
Ambassador on EU harmonization laws that he claimed would put 
an end to Iranian visa-free travel. End Summary. 
 
 
COUNTER TERRORISM TRAINING 
 
 
¶2. (C) The Ambassador commended the Turkish National Police 
for very thorough and aggressive investigations into the 
Istanbul bombings and stressed the importance of a close 
working relationship between Post and the TNP.  Aksu contends 
the GOT is one step closer to formalizing a CT training 
relationship after concluding a memorandum of intent that 
contains very similar language to Leahy (ATA Memorandum). 
Aksu cited as evidence of the GOT,s commitment to 
cooperation, multiple bilateral security and cooperative 
agreements ranging from combating terrorism, to drug 
smuggling, and human trafficking.  The Ambassador emphasized 
that acceptance of Leahy language would secure CT training 
opportunities with the FBI and DEA. 
 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador reiterated an invitation for a GOT 
delegation to visit the Counter Terrorism Center in 
Washington.  Both agreed the invitation would best be 
accepted following PM Erdogan,s late-January U.S. visit ) 
demonstrating positive results from Erdogan,s visit to the 
U.S. 
 
 
 
 
OUTSTANDING ASSISTANCE FROM SYRIA 
 
 
¶4. (C) Aksu asserted that his recent meeting with President 
Assad highlighted greatly improved Turkish-Syrian cooperative 
CT efforts.  Immediately following the Istanbul bombings the 
TNP furnished a list of suspects to Syrian authorities.  The 
list included detailed intelligence, photos and other 
identifying data, on suspected conspirators.  Syria responded 
immediately by extraditing the conspirators and those who 
sheltered them.  Aksu claimed that Syria,s assistance 
resulted in the quick capture of many of the conspirators. 
 
 
 
 
VISA RESTRICTIONS ON IRANIANS WILL BE ADDRESSED THROUGH EU 
HARMONIZATION LAWS 
 
 
¶5. (C) The Ambassador noted the importance of instituting 
visa requirements on travelers from Iran.  Aksu said he 
agreed, but indicated the issue of visa-free travel would be 
addressed on a more general level (not just targeting Iran) 
as part of the larger effort to harmonize Turkish and 
European travel laws. Aksu concluded, &It will take some 
time.8 
 
 
 
 
NEW AIRPORT SECURITY RULES STILL NOT FLYING 
 
 
¶6. (C) Aksu said he supports closing a customs and 
immigration loophole in Turkish airport security that enables 
travelers to avoid checks at Turkish border and customs 
controls.  He said the administrative details of implementing 
&passenger and baggage checks at the first port of entry8 
are still be hammered out by the Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation. 
EDELMAN