This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 000535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA 
STATE FOR IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION FEB 14-16: IRAQ, PEACE 
PROCESS, HALLIBURTON 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Dire assessments of US-led efforts in Iraq as 
generating "stumbling chaos" are juxtaposed with the 
conflict in Palestine on Kuwait's op/ed pages this week.  On 
the issue of whether local Kuwaiti firms improperly profited 
from contracts with US company Halliburton to provide fuel 
oil to Iraq, commentators opine that the lack of 
transparency in deliberations by Kuwait's National Assembly 
will ultimately impede any real disclosures in the case. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  "How Does President Bush Run the Occupation's Steering 
Wheel" 
Dr. Abdullah Al-Nafisi wrote in independent Al-Watan (2/14): 
"Between their military might and poor diplomacy in Iraq, 
the Americans are lost.  They don't seem to possess the 
least bit of political intelligence needed to run the areas 
under their occupation.  Furthermore, Bush represents the 
most radical image of his Administration; he is dominated by 
inconsistent and distorted impressions about managing this 
occupation.  He and his political team are more interested 
in the Halliburton-KBR contracts than in the daily political 
grind prevalent amongst Iraq's numerous political parties. 
Bush's style in communicating on Iraq, by alleging victory 
in the midst of stumbling chaos, is no different in its 
essence than Al-Sahaf (former Iraqi minister of 
information).  If I were American, I would say to Bush 
please be quiet. 
 
¶3.  "If a Corruptor Brings Bad News ." 
Dr. Sami Naser Khalifa wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-A'am 
(2/14):  "America has declared its intention of dividing 
Iraq by sectarian denomination to Sunni, Shia, Arabs and 
Kurds under the pretext of federalism.  Terms such as Sunni 
triangle, and the Shia South continue to be heavily used in 
the American press.  All Iraqis, regardless of their sect 
and religious denomination, must unite in confronting the 
danger represented by this American plan that aims at 
creating a chasm among Iraqis." 
 
¶4.  "Avoiding the Snake does not mean Safety" 
Dr. Naji Saoud Al-Zaid wrote in independent Al-Qabas (2/15): 
"We hope that living conditions in Iraq will improve, and 
that our government will take caution against rushing 
emotionally toward Iraq and the Iraqis. The American 
position is very clear; by exerting pressure on the United 
Nations to play a more significant role in running the 
affairs of a free Iraq, America, in an election year wants 
to rid itself of the security liability in the fastest 
possible time and with the minimum of costs, so that the 
United Nations can take the blame." 
 
¶5.  "Sharon's Shadow" 
Saleh Al-Shayji wrote in independent Al-Anba (2/15): 
"Because we want the Palestinian child to be happy, to go to 
school, to eat well, and live a normal life, we are against 
the business of selling blood.  We are against Ahmad Yaseen 
(Hamas), Rantisi (Hamas), Shami (Jihad), and all who walk a 
bloody path.  These people were able to build their glory at 
the expense of the simple and needy Palestinians, and tempt 
them with money so that their children were sacrificed for 
the likes of Yaseen.  We want the Palestinian children to be 
productive and to lead a normal life, therefore, 
Palestinians must begin their struggle by eliminating such 
people so that they can live in security." 
 
¶6.  "Palestine's War. A Loser's War?" 
Dr. Shafiq Al-Ghabra wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-A'am 
(2/16):  "Continued Israeli incursions and massacres 
committed in Gaza are escalating the degree of danger.  As 
long as civilians are the targets of Israeli attacks, Hamas 
and Jihad gain political strength, while the PA is weakened. 
In turn, the Palestinian resistance reflects the desperate 
measures they are willing to undertake, in order to depart 
from the current status quo.  The situation will only result 
in Israel's demise and more Palestinian losses.  The 
situation has reached a dead end, but every dead end is a 
beginning of a new road." 
 
¶7.  "A Matter of Envy, Not Corruption" 
Influential editor-in-chief Ahmed Al-Jarallah wrote in 
independent Al-Seyassah (2/15):  "The Halliburton affair is 
not about public funds, but a dispute between private 
companies.  It seems obvious that the companies, which did 
not get a share in the profits, are the ones lamenting their 
loss and demanding a sweep against alleged corruption.  The 
crux of the matter is that a Kuwaiti company profited from 
dealing with an American company, so where is the corruption 
in that?" 
 
¶8.  "Halliburton. To You" 
Rashed Al-Rada'an wrote in independent Al-Watan (2/16): 
"The minister of energy demonstrated his preparedness to 
cooperate with the parliamentary committee on the 
Halliburton contract.  The fact is that the parliamentary 
committee will not be able to conduct a thorough inquiry as 
long as the case is under investigation by the public 
prosecutor.  Therefore any public announcements by the 
committee before the outcome of the investigation will only 
cause it embarrassment.  Our experiences with parliamentary 
inquiries are bitter, because after numerous previous 
inquiries, justice was never achieved.  The Halliburton case 
requires transparency on a national scale, a clean 
conscience and a calm solution." 
 
¶9.  "Winds of Valentine" 
Nabil Al-Fadhel wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-A'am (2/16): 
"Halliburton's shockwaves continue to ripple through the 
Kuwaiti arena, especially in the absence of parliamentary 
transparency, due to lack of information.  Our concern is, 
was there foul play on the Kuwaiti side?  It is clear that 
public funds were not violated, since Al-Tanmiya (Kuwaiti 
subcontractor) offered twenty million dollars as a bank 
guarantee.  As for the affair being reported in the American 
press, its relevance will not pass unnoticed by the two 
political parties fighting a vicious tactical strategy in an 
election year." 
 
Urbancic