This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 AMMAN 000585 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN 
USDOC 4520/ITA/MAC/OME/NWIEGLER 
PASS TO USTR - E. SAUMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD KIPR JO WTO
SUBJECT: COMMERCE A/S LASH RAISES TRADE ISSUES WITH DPM 
HALAIQA 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 460 
     ¶B. 03 AMMAN 7182 
     ¶C. 03 AMMAN 6449 
     ¶D. 03 USDOC 3249 (27 JUNE 2003) 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  FOR USG USE ONLY. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  Department of Commerce Assistant 
Secretary William Lash and Ambassador Gnehm met January 10 
 
SIPDIS 
with Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Industry and Trade 
Mohammad Halaiqa to review bilateral trade issues and discuss 
the prospects for Jordanian companies doing business in Iraq. 
 While praising Jordan as a model of trade relations and 
economic reform in the region, A/S Lash raised key 
intellectual property rights (IPR) issues of concern to U.S. 
industries.  He also called on the Government of Jordan (GOJ) 
to re-think its DAMAN pre-shipment inspection program (Refs), 
which could block market access.  Halaiqa showed 
understanding of the issues and agreed to a follow-on meeting 
with the GOJ agency sponsoring the DAMAN program.  Halaiqa 
expressed his appreciation for the fact that Jordanian 
companies could compete for $18 billion in Iraq 
reconstruction contracts, and asserted that the GOJ would 
help facilitate these and Jordanian-Iraqi joint ventures in 
an effort to assist Iraq over the long term.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U)  A/S Lash and the Ambassador called on DPM Halaiqa at 
his Prime Ministry office. They were accompanied by Fred L. 
Schwien of the Office of the Secretary, Department of 
Commerce; Laurie Farris, Embassy Amman Commercial Counselor; 
Naomi Wiegler, International Trade Administration, Department 
of Commerce; and Greg Lawless, Economic Officer (notetaker). 
The atmosphere was informal on a Saturday afternoon (when 
most offices are closed).  DPM Halaiqa displayed the full 
range of his character as a warm host, a proud champion of 
economic reform, a committed and well-informed trade partner, 
and an excited participant in the January 11-13 Iraq OUTREACH 
2004 trade show, which he planned to kick off that evening. 
 
Jordan as a Model;  IPR Issues 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  A/S Lash, noting that Jordan was a model of trade 
liberalization and economic reform in the region, said the 
overall trade relationship was good and that the U.S. was 
looking forward to expanding our partnership.  Halaiqa 
interjected with a story about the U.S. Arab Economic Forum 
held in Detroit last September.  When Arab League Secretary 
General Amr Moussa spoke he did not even mention Jordan, said 
Halaiqa, who later went up to Moussa to let him know that he 
had noticed.  Halaiqa said with a grin that he told Moussa 
Jordan didn't mind the lack of an AL endorsement because 
Jordan didn't need it.  A/S Lash responded that both he and 
State Department Assistant Secretary for Economic and 
Business Affairs Wayne had talked about promoting the 
Jordanian model of economic reform. 
 
¶4.  (U)  With such a strong bilateral relationship, continued 
A/S Lash, the USG wants to do more, including to see that new 
copyright legislation is passed by the GOJ.  There are IPR 
issues regarding information technology (IT) and also with 
phonograms and the USG would like to see new legislation in 
these two areas.  Of course, he continued, when everyone is 
using licensed software, life is simple.  IPR enforcement is 
another area where the USG has an interest, said A/S Lash who 
offered to help with an awareness campaign that derives from 
U.S.-based industries.  The USG would follow up on this and 
could supply some information, if needed, he continued, 
noting that concerned industries would have a vested interest 
in an awareness campaign. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  DPM Halaiqa replied that the GOJ had done some 
work on copyright legislation, recently having reviewed the 
issue with Ambassador Gnehm (Ref A).  Everything should be 
fine in this area and the U.S. should be happy about it, he 
averred.  The GOJ had made commitments regarding use of 
licensed software, he noted (FTA, Article 4, para 15;  see 
Reftel A regarding a new effort by the GOJ to circulate a 
notice on authorized use of software).  This is very 
important to the GOJ, because credibility is very important; 
the GOJ does what it says, he noted.  To attract investors it 
is also important to fulfill commitments, he said.  Noting 
that bureaucracy and lack of resources hamper the GOJ's 
efforts, the good intentions are there, he added.  The GOJ 
could use some help in IPR, although lawyers in the private 
sector sometimes consult.  The USAID program on Achievement 
in Market Friendly Initiatives and Results (AMIR) was another 
source of assistance, he said.  He would let the USG know if 
further assistance was needed on IPR. 
DAMAN - The Trade Barrier Keeps Growing 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  A/S Lash asserted that whenever he has seen 
pre-shipment inspection regimes, they have always presented 
trade problems.  Usually these programs are seen in least 
developed countries, in Latin America and Africa, he 
continued.  The DAMAN program sponsored by the Jordan 
Institute of Standards and Metrology (JISM) was such a 
program, though A/S Lash acknowledged the concerns raised by 
a JISM study that showed that current border controls did not 
adequately assure consumer and environmental safety. 
Nonetheless, he continued, there was no evidence of any 
consumer damage from U.S.-manufactured products.  The DAMAN 
program was discriminatory in that it did not apply to 
Jordanian products and the potential inspections slowed down 
trade flows, he concluded. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  DPM Halaiqa responded that the GOJ did not mean 
for DAMAN to be a trade barrier or discriminatory.  It would 
be applied to domestic industries soon, he said. The GOJ 
wants trade to be smooth.  Since notifying the WTO about the 
program, the GOJ has not received a formal complaint, he 
added.  He said that he would examine the volume of trade 
affected and the time that it was taking.  If there was a 
problem, he would take action, he said. (NOTE:  French firm 
Bureau Veritas, which runs the DAMAN program, told the 
Embassy that only certain industries are targeted for the 
first half of 2004 under a limited licensing program.  BV 
Regional Manager Andrew Yell has not committed to a set 
timeline by which a the domestic program, originally set to 
start in 2007, would be up and running, saying only that BV 
is "working with the government."  On volumes, BV told the 
Embassy that about USD 3 million in U.S. goods have been 
affected over the first four months, including about USD 1 
million in new automobiles.  However, this does not include 
GM cars from South Korea, which is the third most affected 
country in the program, after Japan and China.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  A/S Lash said that the USG compiles an estimate of 
trade barriers.  It is a big book that is now being assembled 
and the interagency process will be looking at Jordan.  DPM 
Halaiqa agreed with A/S Lash that Jordan would not want to be 
listed for trade barriers, especially as an FTA partner. 
Another form of barrier in the DAMAN system, A/S Lash 
continued, was the mis-use of standards, including those used 
for IT products and for automobiles.  The USG recognized 
multiple international standards, he said, but the 
combination of EU standards used in DAMAN and the small 
presence of BV labs in the U.S. did not help our exporters. 
Others in the USG delegation raised the fees U.S. exporters 
had to pay and the "real problems" posed by EU standards in 
the DAMAN program. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  DPM Halaiqa replied that  DAMAN applies to only 40 
items and if a manufacturer has a certified product they only 
have to submit the paperwork to Bureau Veritas.  This could 
benefit the U.S. The GOJ is importing more goods from Asia 
which are of very poor quality, he averred.  The standards 
are "a mix" of European and other standards he said. (NOTE: 
In a January 8 briefing to the diplomatic community by Bureau 
Veritas, Andrew Yell revealed that Jordan will be expanding 
the DAMAN program to include other electronics, electronic 
parts, and medical equipment, among other product categories. 
END NOTE.) 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  A/S Lash said that the use of multiple standards 
was acceptable so long as they were standards openly 
developed and used.  Expressing the hope that there was not a 
perceived rift on this issue, A/S Lash said that some nations 
use standards as a way to block market access or steal market 
share.  That and the extra paperwork and fees required by 
DAMAN would mean that U.S. exporters will complain to 
Secretary Evans, who will then ask A/S Lash to fix the 
 
SIPDIS 
problem.  He hoped that the issue could be addressed before 
that happened, he said. 
 
¶11.  (U)  DPM Halaiqa said that he would arrange to have a 
meeting between a U.S. representative and JISM Director 
General Ahmad Hindawi, in Halaiqa's presence, so that the 
issue could be clarified.  The Ambassador thanked DPM Halaiqa 
for this offer, saying that he knew that the DPM would work 
on the issue from the right point of view. 
 
Iraq Reconstruction 
------------------- 
¶12.  (SBU)  In an exchange on Jordan's role in Iraq's 
reconstruction DPM Halaiqa expressed appreciation for U.S. 
support in such endeavors as the Iraq OUTREACH 2004 trade 
show, but noted that follow-up was key.  He also referred to 
an MOIT program identifying potential U.S. company partners 
and matching Jordanian firms, which was receiving a good 
response.  A side effort of the GOJ, he said, was to 
encourage Jordanian companies to join with Iraqi firms.  The 
target is to work with Iraqis as sub-sub-contractors, he 
said, in an effort to assist Iraq over the long term. 
 
¶13.  (U)  This cable has been cleared by Assistant Secretary 
Lash. 
GNEHM