This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, INL/LP, DRL/PHD, AND CA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/19/2014 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV KCRM KJUS CVIS HO
SUBJECT: HONDURAN CONGRESSMAN ARMANDO AVILA PANCHAME 
SENTENCED TO 20 YEARS FOR DRUG TRAFFICKING 
 
REF: 03 TEGUCIGALPA 1622 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco L. Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (U) National Party Deputy, Armando Avila Panchame, who was 
convicted February 12th for drug trafficking, was sentenced 
February 19th to 20 years in prison.  His sentence stemmed 
from his arrest July 6, 2003, while attempting to flee the 
scene of a drug trafficking airplane crash in the eastern 
department of Olancho (reftel).  He subsequently requested 
that his congressional immunity be waived to stand trial. 
Avila Panchame's conviction marks the first time a Honduran 
court has convicted a legislator for drug trafficking. 
 
¶2. (U) The presiding judge on the case, Ramon Ovidio Navarro, 
is the newly selected Honduran Attorney General (AG), 
replacing outgoing AG Roy Edmundo Medina (septel).  Navarro 
is expected to assume his new position on March 12.  The 
verdict was rendered, however, prior to his selection as AG. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Avila Panchame's conviction and accompanying heavy 
sentence is a major step forward in the Government of 
Honduras' (GOH) effort to stem the rampant corruption and 
sense of impunity that permeates the Honduran Congress.  His 
case received considerable media coverage and generated much 
public interest.  This conviction and sentencing is the first 
one in some time that will result in a high level GOH 
official doing considerable jail time for involvement in 
narcotics trafficking. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: Post has heard persistent rumors, emanating 
from high levels within the GOH, that Avila Panchame's 
conviction and sentence were intended to "offer him up" as a 
sacrificial lamb, in an effort to demonstrate to the U.S. the 
GOH's commitment to combating drug trafficking and corruption 
at the highest levels.  Also, it was a showcase for the new 
AG candidate to demonstrate his judicial toughness on 
impunity by corrupt Honduran officials.  It remains to been 
seen, however, what kind of zeal the Public Ministry will 
exhibit under Navarro's leadership in pursuing other high 
level cases.  Reports on his background raise serious 
questions about his ability to pursue such cases. 
Nonetheless, the Avila Panchame conviction is a watershed in 
Honduras.  End Comment. 
PALMER