This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ZAGREB 000085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
USDA FOR FAS/OA/BSIMMONS 
 
USDA FOR APHIS/DRS/JTURNER 
 
STATE FOR EB/MTA/ATT 
 
VIENNA FOR FAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD SENV TBIO TSPL HR
SUBJECT: PROPOSALS FOR BIOTECH EDUCATION ACTIVITIES 
 
REF: A) FAS WASHDC 663775  B) 03 ZAGREB 2224 
 
¶1.  In response to ref A, Mission proposes the following 
biotech outreach activities: 
 
-- placement of biotech articles targeted for Central 
European market, especially those by European authors. 
 
-- funding to help promote local pro-biotech organizations. 
 
-- organize trips for regulators to EU countries that are 
relatively pro-biotech, e.g., Spain, to see their approval 
process. 
 
-- funding to support travel of Croatian biotech 
stakeholders and journalists to U.S. and to Europe, for 
international conferences and to meet pro-biotech groups 
(currently, anti-biotech NGOs fund travel to meet with 
anti-GMO speakers and groups). 
 
¶2.  Target Markets: 
 
The U.S. has export growth potential in the following 
markets, which would be stymied by anti-biotech attitudes 
and legislation: 
 
-- soybeans 
-- processed food that contains soybeans and corn 
-- feed that contains soybeans and corn 
 
¶3.  Current Conditions in the Targeted Markets - affecting 
the intended commodity or product: 
 
-- FAS Zagreb will email table containing details of 
imports to Croatia from World and U.S. for the targeted 
commodities to FAS/ICD and FAS/OA/BIG.  In 2002 the U.S. 
exported approximately $1 million in course grains, $1 
million in soybean meal, $1 million each in non-nut snack 
foods, breakfast cereal and pet food, and $7 million in 
other consumer-oriented products. 
 
-- Please see ref B for details of Croatian legislation 
regarding biotech.  In brief, a framework of laws has been 
enacted that in theory will allow the import and 
cultivation of biotech products, under heavy regulation. 
How these laws will be implemented will in great part 
depend on how the public perceives the risk of biotech 
products. 
 
¶4.  Project Objectives: 
 
To open the door for U.S. products in Croatian market by: 
 
-- demonstrating that Croatia can be "European," risk- 
adverse, environmentally sensitive and use biotech at the 
same time. 
 
-- convincing consumers, regulators and politicians that 
biotech is safe. 
 
¶5.  Performance Measures: 
 
Changes in market accessibility for mentioned products, to 
be measured by: 
 
-- increased number of neutral or positive press reports on 
television and in print; 
 
-- first approvals for biotech products 
 
¶6.  Rationale: 
 
This market could close for almost all food products 
containing even traces of "GMOs."  In the future, the 
Croatian model may be followed by Bosnia and Herzegovina 
and other countries in the region, increasing the injury to 
U.S. exporters and local consumers.  We need not only 
to communicate the safety of this technology and 
quality of U.S. products, we need to "Europeanize" 
biotech.  Currently, biotech is seen in Croatia as an 
American imposition.  Anti-biotech forces continually 
say they are following the "European way," which to 
their minds means no-GMOs.  We need to show that biotech 
has been used in Europe for years, and that there 
are pro-biotech countries and forces in Europe. 
Activities will probably not have an immediate, 
 
obvious impact but over time they should create a more 
balanced Croatian position about biotechnology, openness to 
consumer choice, and allow U.S. products to re-enter the 
market. 
 
FRANK 
 
 
NNNN