This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 001078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2014 
TAGS: PREF PREL KPAL KWBG IZ JO
SUBJECT: UNHCR CONFIRMS IT WILL NOT PURSUE RESETTLEMENT OF 
IRAQI-PALESTINIANS FROM RUWEISHED REFUGEE CAMP 
 
REF: A. 03 CAIRO 10867 
 
     ¶B. HILL/POLASCHIK E-MAIL 2/9/04 
 
Classified By: DCM David Hale per 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary and comment:  Contrary to statements made by 
UNHCR's regional mission in Cairo (ref a), UNHCR Jordan 
Representative Bronee confirmed that UNHCR currently does not 
plan to pursue resettlement of Iraqi-Palestinians outside the 
region.  UNHCR would only consider third-country resettlement 
for the 345 Palestinians remaining in the Ruweished refugee 
camp after all other options have been exhausted, including a 
return to Iraq, a "return" to their country of origin or 
local integration in Jordan.  Bronee told refcoord, "We are 
not at that point yet."  UNHCR and the GOJ commented 
separately that a move by UNHCR to recognize Palestinians as 
refugees under the 1951 Convention would be viewed as a 
dramatic shift in global refugee policy and a conspiracy to 
solve the Palestinian refugee question outside a negotiated 
political solution.  Given the many sensitivities surrounding 
Palestinian refugee policies, we recommend that the 
Department not consider this caseload for resettlement.  End 
summary and comment. 
 
¶2.  (U) In response to queries raised ref a and b, refcoord 
contacted UNHCR Jordan Representative Sten Bronee February 10 
to clarify UNHCR plans to find a durable solution for the 345 
Iraqi-Palestinians remaining in the Ruweished refugee camp. 
Bronee confirmed that UNHCR policy -- as presented to 
resettlement countries in a December 2003 briefing in Geneva 
-- is to consider third-country resettlement for 
Iraqi-Palestinians only after all other options have been 
exhausted.  "We are not at that point yet," Bronee added. 
UNHCR is currently pursuing other durable solutions for this 
group, including return to Iraq, a "return" to the West Bank 
or Gaza and local integration in Jordan or other Arab 
countries.  Bronee reported that UNHCR has just sent a second 
letter to the Israeli Ambassador in Geneva requesting that 
the GOI allow the 345 Iraqi-Palestinians to "return" to the 
West Bank and Gaza. 
 
¶3.  (U) Bronee also confirmed that UNHCR has not recognized 
as Convention-definition refugees any of the 1,200 
Iraqi-Palestinians who fled to Jordan between March and May 
2004 and does not plan to conduct refugee status 
determination interviews for any Iraqi-Palestinians in 
Jordan.  (The GOJ allowed 386 Iraqi-Palestinians with family 
ties to Jordan to reside permanently in Jordan, while nearly 
500 other Iraqi-Palestinians have voluntarily returned to 
Iraq.  345 Iraqi-Palestinians remain in the UNHCR camp at 
Ruweished, Jordan.)  UNHCR has registered the 
Iraqi-Palestinian population for assistance purposes only; 
under a long-standing agreement between UNHCR and UNRWA, 
UNHCR does not recognize Palestinians as refugees in UNRWA's 
areas of operations (Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, West Bank and 
Gaza).  Bronee commented that any move by UNHCR to recognize 
Palestinian refugees under the 1951 Convention would create 
"political shock waves" in the region. 
 
¶4.  (C) In a separate February 10 meeting, GOJ Department of 
Palestinian Affairs Director General Abdulkarim Abulhaija 
told refcoord that UNHCR recognition of Palestinian refugees 
in an UNRWA area of operation would be viewed as a dramatic 
shift in global refugee policy.  Any U.S. resettlement of 
UNHCR-recognized Palestinian refugees would be interpreted as 
a conspiracy to solve the Palestinian refugee question 
outside the parameters of a negotiated political solution, 
with difficult political ramifications.  Abulhaija predicted 
that any changes in existing Palestinian refugee policies 
would result in high-level condemnation from the Arab League. 
 On the other hand, he added, quiet acceptance of 
Palestinians under U.S. and European immigration -- rather 
than refugee -- programs could prove to be an acceptable 
humanitarian solution for this caseload, provided the 
processing was handled in a low-key and case-by-case fashion. 
 (UNHCR has given us a list of Iraqi-Palestinians with close 
family ties to the U.S. and we are preparing a response that 
outlines our immigrant visa requirements.) 
 
¶5.  (C) Comment: Given the many sensitivities surrounding 
Palestinian refugee policies, we recommend that the 
Department not consider Iraqi-Palestinians for the U.S. 
refugee resettlement program.  We continue to work with 
UNHCR, the GOJ and other neighboring governments to find 
solutions for this group that do not include resettlement 
outside the region. 
 
¶6.  (U) CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
GNEHM