This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T THE HAGUE 000102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2014 
TAGS: PHUM PTER IR NL PREJ IQ
SUBJECT: IRAQ/MEK:  DUTCH WILL ACCEPT CITIZENS, CONSIDER 
OTHERS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 8997 
 
Classified By: A/PolCouns Nathaniel Dean Reasons 1.5 (b) (c) and (d) 
 
¶1. (S) PolOff delivered reftel demarche to MFA Head of Gulf 
States Adri van Loopik, Iran Senior Policy Advisor Arnout 
Wegerif, and Political Affairs Policy Officer Wouter Jurgens. 
 MFA contacts appreciated the information, and would like to 
obtain details as soon on possible on any individuals 
carrying Dutch passports and/or residency information.  Van 
Loopik stated that the Netherlands will accept Dutch citizens 
currently being held, and will consider those with residency 
ties to the Netherlands.  Coordination will need to take 
place via the Dutch Embassy in Baghdad and the MFA. (Note: 
The Dutch Embassy remains officially closed; however, embassy 
officials travel regularly to the mission.)  Documents will 
likely need to be sent to the Netherlands for verification. 
Van Loopik was not surprised to hear that there may be Dutch 
citizens among those MEK members currently being held; he has 
heard of Dutch citizens working with MEK via other channels. 
 
¶2. (C) On the subject of possibly accepting individuals with 
no ties to the Netherlands, van Loopik stated that GoNL 
policy is to relocate refugees regionally.  However, the GoNL 
would review such a request carefully.  Jurgens went further 
to note that if acceptance of MEK detainees would aid in 
solving a security issue within Iraq, the GoNL might be more 
inclined to give additional consideration to the issue. Van 
Loopik and Jurgens both agreed that the GoNL would not/not 
favor the forced return of MEK detainees. 
 
¶3. (U)  Note:  The MEK is active in the Netherlands and has 
conducted several multi-day demonstrations in front of the 
Embassy. 
SOBEL