This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

231543Z Jan 04C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR E, EUR/SE, AND EB/IFD 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - LOEVINGER, MILLS AND LEICHTER 
NSC FOR BRYZA AND MCKIBBEN 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2009 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: IMF RESREP: TURKEY IS OFF TRACK 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 379 
     ¶B. ANKARA 259 
     ¶C. ANKARA 136 
     ¶D. ANKARA 128 
 
 
Classified by Economic Counselor Scot Marciel for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Despite diplomatic public statements, the 
first stage of the IMF's Seventh Review Mission found Turkey 
to be seriously off-track, according to IMF Resrep Odd Per 
Brekk.  The backsliding is notable with regard to two 
"pillars" of the program--fiscal discipline and banking 
sector reforms, though the IMF is not saying so publicly. 
Contrary to press reports, the IMF and the GOT are still far 
apart on fiscal measures needed to close the estimated 2 
percent of GDP fiscal gap forecast for 2004, as a result of a 
combination of recent populist measures and a pre-existing 
gap in meeting 2003 fiscal targets.  In Davos and Washington, 
IMF M.D. Kohler and Deputy M.D. Krueger will deliver strong 
warnings to senior GOT officials.  Brekk and his deputy 
pointed out that a message of "stick to the economic reforms" 
is unlikely to be as effective as a message of "Turkey needs 
to get back on the reform track." End Summary. 
 
 
Confusing Press Reports on the first stage of the Seventh 
Review Mission: 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
 
¶2. (Sbu) As the IMF Seventh Review Mission left Turkey 
January 21, the Turkish Treasury issued a statement that the 
IMF had accepted the GOT's plan to cut discretionary spending 
ten percent to help offset the recent, budget-busting minimum 
wage and pension hikes.  In earlier telephone conversations, 
and in a meeting January 23, IMF Resident Representative Odd 
Per Brekk and his deputy, Christoph Klingen, explained that 
the IMF had consented to the ten spending cut as a 
necessary--but in no way sufficient--compensatory measure 
needed to partially cover the expected fiscal gap.  Brekk 
lamented that much of the local press and the finacial 
analyst community had interpreted the Treasury statement as 
implying the Fund and GOT had reached agreement on the 
necessary fiscal measures, when, in fact, they are far apart. 
 
 
GOT-Fund differences on filling the Fiscal Gap: 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
¶3. (C) On fiscal issues, the IMF sees a 2004 fiscal gap of 
about 2 percent of GDP, caused by a combination of the recent 
populist measures and the 2003 gap which is carrying over 
into 2004.  Though final 2003 numbers are still not 
available, the IMF is fairly confident that the GOT missed 
the critical 6.5 percent primary surplus target for 2003 by 
about a half a percent of GNP, mostly due to revenue 
shortfalls.  Brekk explained that the IMF staff proposed a 
list of possible compensatory measures to the GOT worth about 
four percent of GNP, i.e. a menu of possible cuts from which 
the GOT could choose.  After meeting the Prime Minister, 
however, Babacan said that none of the Fund-proposed options 
were politically acceptable. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Before the IMF mission, the GOT announced a ten 
percent across-the-board cut in discretionary spending. 
Brekk noted that the IMF staff have concerns about this 
approach, since it is a far from ideal way to deal with 
fiscal problems and the IMF does not want to leave Turkey 
with a "messed-up" fiscal structure.  On the other hand, 
faced with no other options on which the two sides can agree 
yet, the IMF is going along with the across-the-board 
approach, which includes large cuts in the 
already-beleaguered investment budget.  Brekk said that the 
Fund may even conclude there needs to be a higher-than-ten 
per cent cut, but it may be too late since the GOT is already 
putting the legislation before parliament. 
 
 
¶5. (C) To cover the rest of the gap (about one percent of 
GNP, per the Fund), the GOT is proposing other measures that 
are either not credible to Fund staff, or represent 
backsliding on the IFI goal of reducing bank intermediation 
costs.  Among the latter were GOT proposals to increase the 
resource utilization tax and increasing the withholding tax 
on deposits.  Brekk said these were unacceptable to the IMF. 
The GOT is also pushing for a reduction in the Value-Added 
Tax on textiles and pharmaceuticals.  Though the 
pharmaceuticals VAT reduction will not help the fiscal 
situation and is motivated by social objectives, Klingen said 
it is not expected to result in a significant fiscal cost 
because it would reduce government health spending. On the 
other hand, Brekk and Klingen said the GOT is claiming that 
the textile VAT reduction will increase government revenue 
because it will result in a reduction in fraudulent refunds 
on exports.  Brekk said this was not credible, and Klingen 
pointed out that it was odd that the textile industry would 
be so supportive of a measure that the GOT believes will 
increase tax reveneue from their sector. 
 
 
¶6. (C) According to Brekk, Unakitan argues that the IMF 
should allow "a detour" from strict fiscal targets until the 
long-term benefits of the GOT's tax administration reforms 
improve revenue collection.  Separately, Brekk told us that 
one of the few areas of agreement during the mission was on 
Tax Administration reforms. Klingen explained that Unakitan 
has agreed to make the General Directorate of Revenue (GDR) 
more autonomous, to create a large-taxpayer unit within the 
GDR, and to have tax collection less dependent on the 
"Deftedars" at the local level, basically local Ministry of 
Finance offices that are not fully controlled by the GDR. 
 
 
Banking Sector back to "Square One": 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) Aside from fiscal policy, the other "pillar" of the 
program on which Fund staff are feeling discouraged is the 
banking sector.  In an earlier meeting with U.S. Treasury 
banking sector technical advisors, Klingen said IMF staff are 
not sure whether they are back to "square one" or "minus 
one."  First, though the jury is still out on the new 
managements of the now separate bank supervisory agency 
(BRSA) and deposit guarantee fund (SDIF), the new managers do 
not appear to be as qualified as their predecessors and are 
replacing the entire second-tier of management, if not the 
levels below that.  At SDIF, a tender of assets from 
intervened banks recently failed, when the outgoing SDIF 
board rejected all the bids as too low.  Second, Brekk noted 
that the recent court decision--if not reversed on 
appeal--overturning the SDIF's takeover of Kent Bank and 
Demir Bank could badly undermine the bank regulators' ability 
to take action. Though GOT officials protest that both the 
judiciary and the regulators are independent, the effect of a 
court negation of the Demir Bank takeover would affect one of 
the few large foreign investments in Turkey recently, that of 
HSBC in buying Demir.  Brekk also agreed with econoffs' 
worries about the stalled state bank privatizations, and the 
enlargement of state-owned Halk and Ziraat through the likely 
merger of Pamuk Bank into Halk and the transfer of the Imar 
Bank deposits to Ziraat. 
 
 
Letting Failed Bank Owners Back into the Banking System: 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) If the Demir case is not reversed, the court ruling 
would allow the owners who allowed Demir Bank to fail to 
regain ownership of the bank.  In another, higher-profile 
case, the IMF is concerned about the controversial Cukurova 
group's proposal to SDIF and BRSA to restructure its debts to 
SDIF and Yapi Kredi Bank, as well as to regain control of 
Yapi Kredi.  Brekk and Klingen agreed that it should be a 
violation of the banking act for Cukurova to regain control 
of Yapi Kredi, but they have not ruled out that the GOT and 
BRSA might try to get around the "fit and proper" criteria in 
the act. 
 
 
Central Bank Isolation: 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶9. (C) Brekk said there are no major issues on monetary 
policy.  However, he noted that Central Bank Governor 
Serdengecti is feeling increasingly isolated even though 
senior GOT leaders like Erdogan and Unakitan have learned the 
utility of verbally supporting Central Bank independence. 
 
 
 
 
Post-program IMF role: 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶10. (C) With the end of the IMF's current Standby Arrangement 
coming to a close at the end of this year, GOT officials 
occasionally make public comments about life after the IMF. 
Brekk said they have warned GOT officials against these 
statements since they reduce the GOT's flexibility in case 
further IMF involvement is needed.  Brekk said that, at a 
minimum, the IMF will have a post-program monitoring 
arrangement, as they have in Indonesia, or a Precautionary 
Stand-by. 
 
 
Turkey needs to be told it is Off Track: 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶11. (C) Though some private analysts expect the GOT to take 
politically-difficult measures to get the program back on 
track after the March 28 municipal elections, Brekk pointed 
out that there is a new, opposite school of thought: that  an 
emboldened Government will take a harder line with the IMF, 
and refuse to take the necessary measures.  Brekk, seeming 
more pessimistic than he has since spring 2003, said that the 
economy remains very vulnerable, with huge debt payments into 
the foreseeable future(including a large redemption next 
week). 
 
 
¶12. (C) Klingen made the point that when senior U.S. and IFI 
officials meet with Erdogan and Babacan at Davos and in 
Washington, a message of "stick to the reforms" risks being 
misinterpreted. Since Erdogan believes the GOT is on the 
reform track, this message will not be as effective as a 
warning that Turkey needs to get back on track. Klingen and 
Brekk said that Kohler and Krueger will be giving GOT leaders 
a strong warning to get back "on track." 
EDELMAN