This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 000071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2014 
TAGS: PREL CU PHUM PREL TU
SUBJECT: PATRIARCH AGREES TO HUMAN RIGHTS DIMENSION ON 
UPCOMING CUBA VISIT - DELIVERY OF DEMARCHE 
 
 
REF: A. (A) ATHENS 4489 
     ¶B. (B) STATE 338726 
     ¶C. (C) STATE 309834 
     ¶D. (D) HAVANA 19605 
     ¶E. (E) ISTANBUL 1617 
 
 
Classified By: Consul General David L. Arnett for reason 1.4 (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I plans to 
travel to Cuba to accept title to a rebuilt Greek Orthodox 
Church in Havana.  He has undertaken to raise human rights 
concerns both publicly and privately while in Cuba, and has 
agreed to a reception hosted by U.S., Greek, and Turkish 
diplomats.  Bartholomew has declined Castro's offer of a 
state guest house during his visit to Cuba.  Competition for 
primacy in the Orthodox world with Russia remains a key 
factor influencing his travel to Cuba.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
Deciding to go to Cuba 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) Bartholomew began by thanking the Consul General and 
USG for their support for him over the years.  He said that 
he understood USG misgivings, and respected the USG 
perspective, but felt that he had to go.  He said, "I am 
frequently criticized by Greek nationalists for being an 
instrument of Turkey.  Not going would subject me to further 
criticism of bowing to American influence, and would open the 
USG to criticism of pressuring me against performing a 
pastoral duty.  As a religious man I must find balance 
between these concerns and the misgivings we have about the 
Cuban government." 
 
 
¶3. (C) Bartholomew said that he was obliged to travel to 
Havana to receive the deed to the church from the Cuban 
government, but has taken USG concerns into account while 
planning the trip.  Bartholomew said he had declined an offer 
of staying in an official guest house, but would instead stay 
in a hotel with 1000 supporters who would also be traveling 
to Cuba, most of whom, according to him, are U.S. citizens 
(including Metropolitan Demetrios of the United States). 
Bartholomew plans to attend a reception/luncheon for him 
hosted by Greek and Turkish Ambassadors and the head of USINT 
Havana.  Per his usual practice, Bartholomew plans to make an 
initial courtesy call on the Turkish Ambassador in his 
capacity as a Turkish citizen.  He said he is willing to 
attend a dinner, currently in the planning stage, to be 
hosted by the Turkish Ambassador. 
 
 
A Human Rights Agenda 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C)  Making reference to the prior meeting with CG 
regarding planned travel to Cuba, Bartholomew said he is 
planning to mention human rights concerns in his upcoming 
travel to Cuba.  He said that he plans to raise these 
concerns both in public statements and in private meetings 
with Cuban leadership, noting "I have a feeling that the USG 
will be pleased."  Bartholomew said, however, that he feels 
he must also express gratitude to the Cuban government for 
its assistance in rebuilding the church in Havana, and for 
its support for Orthodoxy.  He said that Cuban officials have 
assured him that his church will have "complete religious 
freedom" in Cuba. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Bartholomew said he understands the concerns of other 
churches in Cuba, however.  He said that he had sent a note 
to the Pope offering his assistance and had "just spoken with 
Monsignor Georges Marovitch of the Papal Nuncio in Istanbul, 
and asked if, during my visit to Cuba, I could be of help to 
the Roman Catholic Church.  I will attempt to use the visit 
to coordinate religious work in solving some of the problems 
faced by the people of Cuba." 
 
 
The Russian Angle 
----------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) CG asked whether the Ecumenical Patriarch would 
publicly urge the Cuban government to give permission for 
building and renovation to other churches that, to date, have 
been denied it.  Bartholomew said that the issue of church 
construction was complicated by the actions of the Russian 
Orthodox Church, especially the political machinations of 
President Putin and Metropolitan Kirill of Smolensk. 
Essentially, if Bartholomew does not go to Cuba, Castro will 
give the church to the Russians, who "always build a church 
wherever there is a Russian Embassy, regardless of the number 
of Russian Orthodox in the area.  The Russians constantly 
pursue political ends through religion." 
¶7. (C) Bartholomew continued, saying that the Russians have 
tried to pressure Castro not to assist the Ecumenical 
Patriarchate in Cuba, and have alleged to Castro and others 
that Bartholomew is working with the CIA in Estonia to thwart 
Russian aspirations there. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) The key motivating factor for Bartholomew's planned 
travel to Cuba is beating the Russian Orthodox Church to the 
punch.  He believes that the measures he has taken (staying 
in a hotel, raising human rights issues publicly and 
privately, providing time to meet with diplomats separate 
from Cuban government-arranged meetings) will prevent the 
visit from being used as propaganda by Castro.  It seems from 
his tone, however, that any direct criticism of the Castro 
regime will be moderate, as Bartholomew seeks to consolidate 
his victory over the Russians. 
ARNETT