This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 000259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/ERA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2014 
TAGS: PREL EU TU NL MEPP
SUBJECT: DUTCH DISCUSS TRANSATLANTIC GOALS WITH AMBASSADOR 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 14874 
 
     ¶B. SECSTATE 14740 
     ¶C. SECSTATE 12593 
     ¶D. SECSTATE 11994 
     ¶E. SECSTATE 10322 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Clifford M. Sobel Reason 1.5 (b) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  MFA SecGen Frank Majoor and Pol Director 
Hugo Siblesz invited Ambassador, DCM, and other embassy 
officials to lunch January 23 to discuss the upcoming Dutch 
EU presidency.  The Dutch hope to work with the U.S. to 
elaborate cooperation in the area of peace and security, 
particularly in the field of non-proliferation.  During its 
tenure as President, the GoNL will implement any measures on 
the Greater Middle East (GME) that arise from the upcoming 
U.S.-EU Summit, while working with the U.S. to encourage 
indigenous democratic movements throughout the region.  The 
Dutch remain guarded on the question of giving Turkey a date 
to begin accession discussions, but warn that the government 
may be forced to provide an opinion to Parliament in advance 
of the European Commission's November report on Turkey.  The 
GoNL is positive about the working relationship with the US 
on economic and commercial issues, and hopeful for increased 
collaboration on regulatory cooperation, corporate governance 
and innovation issues.  On Justice and Home Affairs, the 
Dutch are interested in discussing how to make a more logical 
link between external and internal security concerns.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) In detailing what he believes are the four major 
areas for transatlantic cooperation during the upcoming Dutch 
presidency, MFA Secretary General Frank Majoor expressed a 
desire to develop further practical cooperation in the field 
of peace and stability via serious discussions on both the US 
Security Strategy and the European Security Strategy.  The 
Dutch are interested in determining how best to elaborate 
current cooperation, such as in the area of 
non-proliferation.  Siblesz went on to profile the inclusion 
of non-proliferation guarantees in the EU-Syria association 
agreement, currently under negotiation, as an example of a 
lever to improve states in the region.  In discussing 
economic cooperation, Majoor said he is pleased with how 
active the U.S. is with the DOHA round, and stated his hope 
that the U.S. and EU can obtain results in furthering 
regulatory cooperation, corporate governance, and the revival 
of the Transatlantic Business Dialogue (TABD).  Ambassador 
Sobel opined that the U.S. and EU have much to share in the 
area of innovation, an arena in which transatlantic 
cooperation can benefit all, and invited the Dutch to 
consider whether a conference or meeting might be useful. 
The Dutch showed interest in following up on this idea. 
Majoor also noted that presidencies are often shaped by 
unpredicted crises and expressed confidence in U.S.-EU 
cooperation during the Dutch presidency.  He stated further 
that the U.S. and EU are working closely together in 
addressing concerns in Iraq, North Korea, and the Greater 
Middle East. 
 
¶3.  (C) MFA Political Director Hugo Siblesz reflected on the 
recent PolDir meetings in Dublin, and noted an emerging view 
within both the EU and U.S. for a transformation in tactics 
to promote democracy in the Middle East.  He referred to the 
UNDP Arab Human Development report as an agenda-setting 
document for what the West needs to accomplish in the region, 
stressing the importance of supporting indigenous projects 
rather than trying to "force solutions."  Siblesz also said 
the EU will look to work within existing structures 
(Barcelona process, GCC) to advance goals within the region. 
The Dutch are open to creative new efforts, although they are 
not in favor of creating elaborate new mechanisms such as an 
OSCE-equivalent.  Majoor went on to note that we must 
continue to look at the region inclusively (Mauritania to 
Afghanistan) and in terms of the long-term goals of democracy 
and peace and stability.  The Dutch expect a possible US-EU 
joint statement to materialize from the U.S.-EU Summit in 
June, and will look to carry out such a statement during 
their presidency.  Majoor reinforced that the Dutch are open 
to discussing with the U.S. ways in which to engage the 
countries in the Middle East so as to promote reforms.  The 
Ambassador and DCM welcomed Dutch interest in cooperation, 
noting that we need a joint, tailored carrot and stick 
approach to promote indigenous democracy. 
 
¶4.  (C) On other issues, European Integration Deputy Head 
Derek Oldenburg commented that the GoNL has withheld 
providing an official position to Parliament on whether or 
not to give Turkey a date to start accession talks in 
December. The government has done so by stating the need to 
wait for the Commission's November report on Turkish 
progress, as well as the need to remain an objective EU 
President.  Some important leaders in Parliament are 
skeptical of Turkey's accession.  (Note:  Prime Minister 
Balkenende appears to be building a logical case to 
Parliamentary leaders by saying that if Turkey meets the 
Copenhagen criteria, it should be allowed in.  End note.)  At 
the same time, however, Majoor warned that the US should not 
underestimate the domestic political sensitivity of Turkish 
accession for the Netherlands.  In discussing Justice and 
Home Affairs, Majoor commented that the EU perhaps needs to 
have a more logical link between external and internal 
security.  The Ambassador put on the table the idea that our 
on-going U.S.-EU talks might support the idea of a high-level 
meeting on Department of Homeland Security and third pillar 
issues during the Dutch presidency.  The Ambassador also 
encouraged the Dutch to look at ways in which to expand 
U.S.-Dutch joint cooperation on HIV/AIDS in Africa to the 
entire EU, an idea that was discussed further in meetings 
later in the day. 
SOBEL