This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 000180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA,NEA/ARP, NEA/NGA, NEA/ARN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL MARR ETRD ECON KU IZ FR SY YM
SUBJECT: NEA A/S BURNS'S MEETING WITH FM, JANUARY 14 
 
Classified By: CDA Frank Urbancic for reasons 1.4 b,d 
 
 ¶1. (C) SUMMARY: NEA Assistant Secretary Burns met with 
Kuwaiti Foreign Minister Dr. Mohammed Sabah Al-Salem Al-Sabah 
on the evening of 14 January 2003.  In a wide-ranging 
discussion, the Minister expressed great satisfaction about 
developments in Iraq but insisted that any final decisions 
must wait until a legitimate Iraqi Government is formed.  He 
called for a speedy clarification of the AIK fuel issue. END 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (C) Dr. Mohammed began the discussion by mentioning that 
he had recently attended the Sanaa Inter-Governmental 
Regional Conference on Democracy, Human Rights and the Role 
of the International Criminal Court.  He noted that the 
absence of the US at the conference was conspicuous.  A/S 
Burns remarked that he did not believe that the US had been 
invited to the regional conference and added that the US 
definitely encourages these types of events.  A/S Burns 
insisted that the region must help address the problems in 
Yemen as he noted the marked contrast between the city of 
Sanaa and the tribal areas where the Yemeni Government has 
little control.  He explained that one of the biggest 
challenges for President Saleh is that Yemeni security 
problems cannot be disconnected from the economic problems. 
Dr. Mohammed stated that while the recent GCC summit 
reconfirmed members' commitment to work with Yemen, there was 
no way that Yemen would be accepted as a member.  He jokingly 
mentioned that Iraq is considered a more acceptable candidate 
for membership.  (COMMENT:  The way he said it did not/not 
suggest Iraq stood any chance either. END COMMENT). 
 
Thanking Kuwait 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (C) A/S Burns then explained that the main purpose of the 
meeting was to convey the enormous appreciation the US has 
for Kuwait and to highlight the importance of the US-Kuwaiti 
relationship.  He mentioned that Iraq would not be free if it 
were not for the efforts of Kuwait.  A/S Burns explained that 
the meeting represented an excellent opportunity to consult 
on Iraqi developments but that other bilateral issues should 
also be dealt with. 
 
French Interests 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Dr. Mohammed stated that he had just hosted French 
Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin, who had raised the 
need for an international conference on Iraq.  The French, 
according to Dr. Mohammed, thought that the US should be 
gradually transferring power to the Iraqis before the 30 June 
official transition of authority.  A/S Burns responded that 
the USG is very serious about the transition process and 
thought that the French proposal was a false argument.  He 
explained that the US is transferring power now and offered 
the example that many Iraqi ministers have much more power 
today than even a few months ago.  He intimated, however, 
that there must be a military coalition presence in Iraq for 
some time to come. (NOTE: Dr. Mohammed was clearly not 
supportive of the French proposal. END NOTE) 
 
¶5. (C) A/S Burns said that a big conference on Iraq was not 
necessary.  What is more important, he relayed to Dr. 
Mohammed, are building-blocks of support such as the Madrid 
Donors' conference, a regional neighbors' conference, and 
possibly another UN resolution, at an appropriate point, to 
codify solid international support. 
 
¶6. (C) The French Foreign Minister had also told Dr. Mohammed 
that there is a need to re-engineer the security structure in 
the Gulf; that the threat from Saddam, Iran, and Syria is 
gone and there should be new ideas of what the international 
community should do to make the region more stable.  Dr. 
Mohammed said that what the French had in mind was UNSCR 598, 
Article 8 and that De Villepin wanted to find a way to inject 
French ideas into the region.  Dr. Mohammed asked if this was 
something new or if the French were just trying to annoy the 
US, as he had not heard these views before.  Burns remarked 
that he had heard similarly vague talk about regional 
security restructuring from the French and stated that the 
issue has been discussed ever since the liberation of Kuwait. 
 He said that what is essential is GCC security interests and 
what GCC members can do to help create a stable security 
structure in the Gulf. 
 
Wait For Sovereign Government 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Dr. Mohammed said the recent GCC summit covered 
relatively little political ground and focused primarily on 
educational reform.  He had found it very refreshing to focus 
on more social policy issues.  He stressed the need to 
withhold any security or political judgments until a 
legitimate Iraqi Government is formed.  He remarked that 
Kuwait does not want to change anything and is content with 
the security arrangement that exists.  He then expressed his 
appreciation for the November 15 Agreement establishing a 
timetable for transferring sovereignty to the Iraqi people. 
He said this was something to be applauded and shared that 
there is much optimism for the plan. 
 
¶8. (C) Dr. Mohammed asked about the issue of federalism in 
Iraq.  He said that while it means many things to many 
people, he had noticed that the Turks expressed some concern 
over it.  He intimated that Kuwait is just trying to 
anticipate the contentious issues.  A/S Burns assured Dr. 
Mohammed that the US will discuss this issue with Kuwait in 
more detail after the Turkish Prime Minister,s upcoming 
visit to Washington. Kuwaiti Ambassador to Washington Salem 
Al-Sabah said he would follow up with NEA. 
 
¶9. (C) A/S Burns stated that the transitional administrative 
law is not meant to be the final word and that time was 
needed to prepare a permanent constitution.  He emphasized 
the importance of a formula that reinforces stability and 
Iraq's unity. Burns remarked that he is impressed by the 
general commitment by the Kurds,the Shia, and the Sunni Arabs 
to supporting Iraq,s unified future. 
 
¶10. (C) Dr. Mohammed criticized recent statements from INC 
official Mudhar Shawkat who called for Kuwait to allow Iraq 
to lease the islands of Warbah and Bubiyan for use as 
seaports.  The Foreign Minister remarked that it was not the 
time to be confronting these issues, that such statements 
were not advisable, and that the region must wait for a 
legitimate Iraqi Government.  On the issue of debt, Burns 
noted to the Foreign Minister that James Baker would be 
coming to Kuwait soon and that the US considers debt 
reduction to be extremely important to the stable future we 
both seek for Iraq. 
 
 
The Sistani Factor 
------------------ 
 
¶11. (C) Dr. Mohammed candidly asked whether the US considers 
Iran a source of concern.  Burns replied that it is a 
concern, but that the Iranians have apparently not made up 
their minds what to do with a new Iraq.  The Kuwaiti Minister 
agreed, stating that the Iranians do not see emerging in Iraq 
anything they are absolutely against, and that they cannot 
seem to galvanize their people against the US.  He remarked 
that many recently contentious issues, such as the call for 
an Islamic state in Iraq, and Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani,s 
calls for elections have quieted down.  As for Kuwait, Dr. 
Mohammed said he is "delighted to have the United States as a 
neighbor." 
 
¶12. (C) A/S Burns remarked that Sistani has not wanted to 
meet with US officials and asked Dr. Mohammed if he had any 
thoughts on Sistani,s role and his approach to the political 
process in Iraq.  Dr. Mohammed, offering his personal view, 
said he was perplexed about Sistani,s call for elections 
because "it doesn,t jibe with his record of staying above 
the fray."  He speculated that Sistani is being pressured to 
take this position and that maybe he is trying to carve out a 
role for himself in the new Iraq.  Dr. Mohammed opined that 
Sistani would not remain aloof from the political situation 
there but that his recent statements reduce him from a 
religious figure to merely another political entity. 
 
Syria 
----- 
 
¶13. (C) The Minister claimed that remnants of the Iraqi Baath 
party were trying to establish themselves in Syria.  A/S 
Burns inquired about the Syrian view of the region.  Dr. 
Mohammed stated that the Syrians are not happy with the Syria 
Accountability Act and they expressed surprise when the 
Kuwaitis did not raise the issue with them in recent 
meetings---in keeping with the perception that the Kuwaitis 
do the bidding of the US in the region.  The Syrian Baath 
party, he pointed out, is beginning to strike out some 
Baathist rhetoric "indicating that change might translate to 
Syria also."  He told Burns that the Syrian political 
situation did appear to be changing and related the story of 
Kuwaiti hunters who had obtained personal permission to hunt 
there from the Syrian Minister of Defense.  Syrian Interior 
Ministry officials, who apparently did not respect the 
signature of the Defense Minister, apprehended the hunters 
and tore up their hunting permits. 
 
Bilateral Issues 
---------------- 
 
¶14. (C) Moving to bilateral issues, Burns stated that the 
Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) would soon be 
signed; this was another way the US could help Kuwait more in 
the direction of economic modernization and reform.  On the 
issue of Trafficking in Persons he pointed out that the 
Embassy was working with the Government of Kuwait (GOK) on 
ideas to ensure that Kuwait as a society is pointed in a 
healthy direction.  He also mentioned the importance of 
Article 98, the necessity for a secure border, and US support 
for compensation claims in the UN Security Council.  Burns 
also shared that an announcement was forthcoming on Kuwait,s 
status as a Major Non-NATO Ally and that the US would consult 
with Kuwait on how best to publicize it as a means of 
highlighting the significance we attach to our relationship. 
 
¶15. (C) Dr. Mohammed expressed concern that the Minister of 
Finance was under attack in the Parliament over his running 
of the ministry and emphasized that he needs a clear 
commitment and a working agreement on AIK to keep it from 
becoming an issue in the Parliament.  He specifically needs 
to know how much fuel is needed and for how long it will be 
required. Burns explained that the US looks forward to 
working through this issue and assured Dr. Mohammed that the 
US understands the GOK need for predictability. 
 
¶16. (C) Dr. Mohammed, in closing, mentioned that Kuwait looks 
forward to signing the TIFA and proudly announced that 
foreign banks and investment institutions can now open 
business in Kuwait.  He then shared that he intends to travel 
to the US sometime in April or May. 
 
¶17. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
¶18. (U) Assistant Secretary Burns has cleared this message. 
 
URBANCIC