This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  VATICAN 000101 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE (Levin); NEA/IPA; NEA/RA; DRL/IRF; EUR/ERA 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
 
TAGS: PREL PHUM VT
SUBJECT: POPE'S VISION IN LINE WITH U.S. GOALS IN IRAQ, 
MIDDLE EAST, AND FIGHT AGAINST TERROR 
 
Ref: Vatican 5643 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
1.In his annual address to the Vatican Diplomatic Corps, 
the Pope emphasized the importance of the international 
community's working together to help the Iraqis to become 
self-governing with a democratically established political 
and economic system.  Observing that Iraqis had been "freed 
from the regime that had oppressed them," he expressed hope 
that Iraq would become a credible partner in the 
international community.  The Pope blasted terrorism and 
said that any civilization worthy of the name should 
categorically reject the use of such violence.  He pointed 
to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict as a root of 
destabilization for the entire region and urged "respect 
for the legitimate aspirations of both sides."  The Pope 
also emphasized the importance of building a more effective 
collective security centered on the United Nations, and 
able to deal with the new challenges of terrorism it has 
failed thus far to master.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
Moving Forward in Iraq 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  In his annual address to the Vatican Diplomatic Corps, 
January 12 (full text sent to EUR/WE), the Pope 
acknowledged the "numerous steps" the Holy See had taken in 
the hopes of avoiding war in Iraq, but focused on the 
importance of the international community's working 
together to aid the Iraqi people.  The Pope said the 
international community should now help the Iraqis, "freed 
from the regime that had oppressed them," to become self- 
governing with a democratically established political and 
economic system.  He also called for Iraq to regain a 
credible place in the international community. 
 
-------------------------------- 
No to Terrorism - and no to War 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  The Pope strongly condemned international terrorism, 
asserting that it dishonored the causes it claimed to serve 
by sowing the seeds of hatred, fear and fanaticism.  He 
stressed that any civilization worthy of the name should 
categorically reject the use of violence.  Significantly, 
he told the gathered diplomats that the international 
community should never resign itself to "passively 
accepting the violence that holds peace hostage."  To 
counter terrorism, the Pope said that "now more than ever" 
it was important to return to a more effective collective 
security centered on the United Nations so that it could 
fulfill the role envisioned for it.  In any event, the Pope 
stressed "the one certainty" that "war could not resolve 
conflicts between peoples." 
 
------------------------------------ 
Return to Negotiation in Middle East 
------------------------------------ 
 
4.The Pontiff described the unresolved Israeli- 
Palestinian issue as a permanent destabilizing factor for 
the entire region, as well as a source of suffering for 
both peoples.  He repeated his admonition to Israeli and 
Palestinian leaders that nothing is resolved by the 
recourse of arms, terrorism and reprisals, or by the 
humiliation of the enemy and hateful propaganda.  He urged 
mutual respect for each entity's legitimate aspirations, as 
well as a return to the negotiating table.  He said that 
concrete efforts on the part of the international community 
were essential to achieve a resolution to the conflict. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Conflicts the World Over Dramatic 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Elsewhere in the world, the Pope noted the damaging 
effects of other conflicts; in particular in Africa.  He 
observed that their impact on local populations was often 
"dramatic," adding that they contributed to poverty and the 
deterioration of the institutional fabric, plunging people 
into desperation.  The Pope also highlighted the danger of 
arms manufacturing and trafficking. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Religion: An important Role to Play 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6.  Not surprisingly, John Paul II stressed the importance 
of religious faith as a means to peace.  He said that 
faith-based respect for inalienable human rights and 
dignity helped create a peaceful and peace-making world. 
In this regard, he urged secular states to do more than 
merely guarantee freedom of worship.  Rather, he said, 
secular society should engage in a respectful dialogue with 
religions to enhance each nation's future.  Church and 
State are not rivals, said the Pope, but rather partners in 
promoting the development of the human person as well as 
social harmony.  The Pope said the difficulty some European 
countries had in accepting religion operating "in the 
public sphere" revealed itself in the recent debate on 
Europe's Christian roots in the EU constitution.  He 
insisted that world leaders should see Christians as a 
resource -- particularly for the process of "education for 
peace," a major theme of his 2004 World Day of Peace 
Message (reftel). 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Comment: Message Tracks with U.S. Policy 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Though some U.S. critics might seize on the Pope's 
rejection of war as a means to resolve conflicts and his 
reference to the Vatican's efforts to avoid war, the core 
of Pope's message provided strong backing for priority 
U.S. goals in Iraq and the Middle East.  The Holy See's 
preference to avoid war is well known; but its insistence 
that the international community should now move forward to 
help the Iraqis achieve a democratic self-government now 
that they have been "freed from the regime that had 
oppressed them" was a very positive message for the U.S. 
Similarly, the Pope's emphasis on a central role for the UN 
-- though implying criticism of the UN's being sidelined in 
Iraq -- reflects the Pope's new interest in revamping 
international law to deal with the challenges of global 
terrorism.  All of this suggests that the U.S. has an 
important ally in the Pope for our goals in Iraq, the 
Middle East, and against terrorism. 
 
¶8.  Minimize considered. 
Nicholson 
 
 
NNNN 
 

 2004VATICA00101 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED