This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MAPUTO 000173 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR AF/RSA 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL PHUM PGOV ECON MZ DHRF
SUBJECT: DHRF SOLICITATION FOR FY2004 
 
REF: STATE 14421 
 
¶1. Post appreciates receiving FY2003 DHRF funding in the 
amount of $70,000. These funds are critical to raising 
awareness of human rights concerns and supporting civil 
society play a more active role in Mozambique's democratic 
consolidation. A status report for FY2002/2003 funds will be 
sent septel. For FY 2004, post requests an increase of 
$30,000, for total FY2004 funding of $100,000. Increased 
funding would focus on the following three areas described 
below. 
 
¶2. A - Elections. In late 2004, Mozambique will hold it's 
third multi-party presidential elections since independence 
in 1975. The current constitutionally-elected president, 
Joaquim Chissano, will step down after having served two 
terms. Chissano and the leadership of FRELIMO dominate 
policy-making and implementation. Mozambique's second 
municipal elections were held on November 19. FRELIMO 
dominated the elections, winning 28 out of the country's 33 
municipalities. Voter turn-out during the November elections 
was low, with less than 28% of registered voters 
participating. The principal opposition party, RENAMO, lacks 
technical and financial resources; independent and 
small-party candidates play an insignificant role. Though the 
November municipal elections were generally well administered 
and described as free and fair by international and local 
observers, a number of outstanding issues will need to be 
addressed before the 2004 presidential elections. In 
particular, the National Assembly must promulgate a new 
electoral law and discrepancies in the voter registration 
lists used in the November elections must be addressed. 
Priority areas for DHRF funding could include civil education 
and outreach for voters and parties, and expanded local 
election observation. 
 
¶3. B- Gender Equality. After years of discussion and months 
of parliamentary debate, a new Family Law was passed by the 
National Assembly in December. The new law replaces large 
portions of the colonial-era Civic Code and brings the law in 
line with equality provisions in the constitution. Primary 
provisions of the new law include raising the marriage age to 
18 for both sexes; eliminating the provision that husbands 
are de facto "head of family"; and legalizing civil, 
religious and co-habitant based marriages. While the new law 
is an important step forward in protecting and promoting 
women's rights in Mozambique, domestic violence and 
widespread discrimination against women in the workplace and 
with regard to property rights remain significant problems. 
Key to the effective implementation of the new law will be 
educating Mozambicans about the law's provisions. The 
Ministry of Women and Social Action Coordination does not 
have adequate technical or financial resources to undertake 
an education campaign about the law. DHRF grants could be 
used to undertake a media and education campaign about the 
law's provisions. 
 
¶4. C- Trafficking in Persons. Mozambique serves as a country 
of origin for trafficked women and children. South Africa 
serves as the principal receiving country. Poverty, a history 
of child migration, weak border controls, and traditional 
cultural practices are all factors contributing to 
trafficking. Over the past year, there has been increased 
attention in the press and among government officials to the 
problem of trafficking in persons in Mozambique. President 
Chissano acknowledged the reality of trafficking in persons 
during his New Year's Day address, and the Attorney General 
is currently investigating allegations of trafficking in 
children (in the context of organ trafficking) in Nampula 
province. In September, the government launched a program of 
consultation with civil society on how to enhance the 
country's child protection policies, including trafficking in 
children. Mozambique does not have anti-trafficking 
legislation, though trafficking can be addressed under other 
laws. Additional efforts have included the "Campaign Against 
Trafficking in Children," launched in 2001, which is aimed at 
raising awareness of the issue. Post is currently supporting 
several anti-trafficking or related projects through DHRF, 
including a series of technical seminars for immigration 
officials. Increased DHRF funding could expand on existing 
programs by providing greater geographic coverage of programs. 
LA LIME