This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 000287 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM EU BM NL
SUBJECT: Dutch policy on Burma 
 
 
¶1. Summary: In a January 28 response to questions from 
Parliament, Foreign Minister Bot outlined Dutch policy on 
Burma. For reasons of effectiveness, the GoNL believes that 
the EU as a whole, and not bilateral Dutch efforts, should 
take the lead in advancing the improvement of the political 
and human rights situation in Burma.  The EU will continue 
to work with other governments in Asia to encourage reforms 
in Burma.  The Netherlands is not adverse to supplemental EU 
sanctions against the country, provided they are targeted 
against the junta and not the population.  The Netherlands 
provides assistance to human right groups and supports 
efforts to strengthen civil society in Burma.  End summary. 
 
¶2. In a letter to parliament, the Foreign Minister explained 
that the Netherlands will urge the EU to abide by its Common 
Position towards Burma, using it as a tool to advance 
improvement of the political and human rights situation. 
The Netherlands supports the EU vision that it is best to 
cooperate with ASEAN countries, China, India and Japan in 
promoting reforms within Burma, as western pressure will 
have a greater effect if done in conjunction with the local 
region. 
 
¶3. Regarding the stand-off between the EU and ASEM (Asian 
countries have threatened to block the accession of the 10 
new EU member states to ASEM if the EU continues to block 
the accession of Burma, Cambodia and Laos), Bot wrote that, 
"Besides ASEM, there are also other instruments to shape the 
Burma policy, such as the Common Position.  Those are 
considerations that the Netherlands must bear in mind.  In 
taking a position, the GONL gives top priority to 
improvement of the political and human rights situation in 
Burma." 
 
¶4. Bot noted that the debate on tightening EU sanctions 
against Burma continues, and member states are divided over 
supplemental sanctions.  The Netherlands is prepared to 
consider all options.  Important factors for the GoNL 
include: developments in Burma, progress with the Burmese 
Road Map, and the degree to which supplemental sanctions 
would truly affect the junta and not the population. 
 
¶5. On the issue of support to Burma's civil society and 
democratic political parties, Bot noted that The Netherlands 
supports Burmese human rights groups and civil society 
capabilities wherever possible.  For example, Burmese groups 
may submit proposals for projects to the Dutch Embassy in 
Bangkok, which directly funds such initiatives.  Funding is 
additionally possible via the MFA's Human Rights Fund.  This 
year, the Netherlands is also the largest donor to the 
general UNAIDS budget, which funds a civil society program 
in Burma.  The Dutch are closely involved with this program. 
 
SOBEL