This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 000233 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC), WHA/OAS (IRVING), DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
USDOC FOR 4322/ITA/MAC/WH/CARIBBEAN BASIN DIVISION 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USFCS/RD/WH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EFIN DR
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN ELECTION SERIES #14: SLOGANS AND A 
SPECIAL SESSION OF CONGRESS 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 00147 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Following is no. 14 in our series on the Dominican 
presidential elections: 
 
SLOGANS AND A SPECIAL SESSION OF CONGRESS 
 
The controversy over a proposed election law change (reftel) 
is heading for a climax.  On January 10 President Mejia 
announced that he would extend the current special session of 
the legislature and officially notified the President of the 
Senate. The additional special session got underway this 
afternoon (September 12). President Mejia said the extension 
was requested not solely to consider the ruling PRD-friendly 
"Law of Slogans" election measure, but also to approve "seven 
or eight very important bills that are in Congress, such as 
the Law on Systemic Risk in the Banking Sector." 
 
January 12 press reports indicate that after a scrub of the 
draft proposal, representatives of four PRD candidates have 
convassed the Congress and believe they have enough support 
to pass a revised "Law of Slogans" bill. Ruling PRD leader 
Tirso Mejia Ricart now claims intellectual authorship, rather 
than little known and often absent legislator Henry Saraff. 
The PRD is counting on its own congressional votes, plus four 
or five from the opposition Social Christian Reform Party 
(PRSC). (As one columnist dryly noted, "There's always the 
man in the corridor with a few thousand pesos in his attache 
case.")  As reported reftel, if the bill does become law, it 
will be challenged, probably in the Supreme Court and the 
Disputes Chamber of the Central Electoral Board (JCE).  Press 
accounts indicate that the most recent version of the bill 
would allow prospective candidates to register directly with 
the JCE, as an alternative to registering with party 
organizations, and thus circumvent obstacles posed by party 
splits.  To comply with the letter of the Constitution that 
requires a direct vote for president, the draft law is likely 
to stipulate that the winner obtain a majority of all votes 
cast -- as does the current electoral law. 
 
THIRD PLACE AND CRUMBLING 
 
The executive committee of the opposition PRSC met January 10 
for three hours and issued a weakly supported resolution 
against the "Ley de Lemas" proposal. Running a distant third 
in the Presidential campaign, the PRSC remains plagued by 
uncertain and divided leadership.  Presidential candidate 
Eduardo Estrella chaired, but only 32 of the 50 members of 
the executive committee attended; of those, only 19 signed 
the  resolution directing PRSC members of Congress to vote 
against the bill. Of the 35 PRSC  congressional 
representatives, just 14 were present. 
 
The PRSC division and dilemma overweighed the bold text of 
the resolution, since only 38 percent of the executive 
committee signed and less than half of the PRSC congressional 
representatives were present. 
 
Estrella is unhappy with the PRD electoral maneuver, since if 
it is carried through, it could shift emphasis in the first 
round from individual candidates to parties.  The PRSC had 
already planned to hold a national congress this month. 
Assuming that Estrella's rival Jacinto Peynado (or a 
stand-in) chooses to run, the PRSC first-round vote is likely 
to be larger than would otherwise be the case, and therefore 
the PRSC might constitute a more convincing swing factor. The 
PRSC "third wave" could be Federico ("Quique") Antun Batlle, 
distant from both of them, who told journalists that because 
of "mean-spirited, out-of-phase opponents" within the party 
he felt pushed to convene his followers and the mid-level 
leadership of the party to formalize his own campaign, known 
by its "slogan" QAP (Quique Antun Presidente). 
MEANWHILE, AT THE FRONT OF THE PACK 
 
As for front-runner Leonel Fernandez, he bought prime time on 
television stations and radio on Sunday night to attack the 
PRD initiative as an irresponsible attempt to "abort" the May 
election "with force and payoffs."  He asserted that polls 
show him with 63 percent of the vote, "43 points more than 
all the PRD pre-candidates combined." Fernandez quoted 
Mejia's comment in a television interview last week -- 
"Political power is there to be used" -- and hammered away at 
it.  Power is not to be used to intimidate the Chamber of 
Deputies into accepting a new president; power is not be used 
to set up a sham Electoral Board; power is not to be used to 
show disrespect for civil society, the church, private 
business, etc., etc., etc. . . After months of trips abroad 
for colloquia and trips to the regions for party conclaves, 
Leonel was angry, passionate, eloquent, and very much back on 
the national scene. 
 
¶2.  (U) Drafted by Angela Kerwin, Michael Meigs. 
HERTELL