This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 000343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR T, AC, AC/CB, NP/CBM, VC/CCB, L/ACV, IO/S 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISP 
JOINT STAFF FOR DD, PMA-A FOR WTC 
COMMERCE FOR BIS (GOLDMAN) 
NSC FOR CHUPA WINPAC FOR LIEPMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2014 
TAGS: PARM PREL LY CWC
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC) - DG PFIRTER'S 
READ-OUT ON HIS DISCUSSIONS IN LIBYA 
 
REF: THE HAGUE 282 
 
Classified By: ERIC M. JAVITS, AMBASSADOR TO THE OPCW.  REASONS: 1.5 (B 
, D) 
 
This is CWC-16-04. 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  OPCW Director General Pfirter was very 
pleased with the outcome of his February 5 discussions in 
Libya, which included a meeting with the Foreign Minister. 
Pfirter utilized the visit to emphasize the OPCW's desire to 
work with Tripoli to meet the requirements of the CW 
Convention, and to introduce his team to Libyan 
interlocutors.  The DG found the Libyans cooperative, and 
very well-briefed by the U.S. and U.K. on CWC requirements. 
The next OPCW team will be arriving in Tripoli on February 16 
and the DG anticipates holding an inspection in Libya on or 
around March 10.  The DG also noted that an Italian team of 
experts will be visiting Libya beginning February 15.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C)  On February 9, DG Pfirter briefed Ambassador Javits 
and U.K. Ambassador Budd on the results of his February 5 
discussions in Tripoli.  Pfirter said he was extremely 
pleased with the talks, having emphasized that the OPCW wants 
to work cooperatively with the Libyans on their CWC 
obligations, and finding the Libyans ready to reciprocate. 
Pfirter said he made clear that the OPCW would work to 
complement the U.S./UK efforts under way, and thought an 
atmosphere of trust had been established with the Libyans. 
The Libyans, commented the DG, had been well-briefed on what 
to expect from the OPCW delegation.  The goal was therefore 
to allow the Libyans to become familiar with the OPCW staff 
with whom they would be working.  However, he also made clear 
to the Libyans that on the specific issue of destruction of 
Libyan CW stocks, Tripoli needed to discuss this matter with 
the U.S. and U.K. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The DG said that the next step would be a visit by a 
team of experts led by Verification Director Reeps.  The team 
would arrive late on February 16 and then meet with the 
U.S./U.K. team in-country to receive a de-brief.  Reeps and 
his team would begin consultations with the Libyans on 
February 18.  The focus of the visit would be on achieving 
the most comprehensive Libyan declaration possible when that 
document is submitted by March 6. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Pfirter said that his visit had been "hijacked" from 
the Libyan MFA by General Mahmood, who heads the relevant 
national research institute.  Mahmood arranged for the OPCW 
team to meet with an interagency group of some 20 
individuals. Pfirter then met with the Libyan Foreign 
Minister.  In both cases, he conveyed the message of 
cooperation noted above.  With the FM, he turned to the issue 
of inspections, commenting that while past practice could 
have allowed the OPCW to wait three months before sending an 
inspection team, that would not be a good sign of the 
seriousness with which the OPCW views Libyan accession. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Instead, the DG thought that it would be best to 
send an inspection team at the earliest possible time. 
Pfirter stressed to the FM that there would be substantial 
interest in the status of activity with Libya at the OPCW's 
Executive Council session on March 23-26.  The DG therefore 
encouraged the Foreign Minister to send a team of both 
political officials and technical experts to the EC 
gathering.  The FM, reported Pfirter, did not respond on that 
particular point, but in general was very supportive and 
interested in the work of the OPCW.  The DG said his message 
was one of trying to assist Libya in meeting the requirements 
of the CWC, and, in the view of the DG, the message went down 
very well. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Following on the point regarding the "hijacking" of 
his visit, the DG commented that there had been some 
logistical difficulties with the trip, and the Libyan MFA had 
told the DG that they would control the next visit.  They 
also emphasized that they will have more of a coordinating 
role in the future, and in that respect, the Libyans made 
statements about seeking to enlarge their mission in the 
Hague. 
 
¶7.  (C)  The Italians, added the DG, are also sending a team 
to Libya in the near future.  The focus of the discussions 
would be on the Italian work on Rabta, although it would also 
touch on issues such as destruction of Libyan CW stocks. 
(Note: The Italian delegation to the OPCW subsequently 
confirmed that their team would be arriving in Tripoli on 
Sunday, February 15, with their experts staying in-country 
for about a week.  End Note.)   Reeps said that the Libyans 
are still thinking about the options for methods of 
destruction of their CW stocks.  One possibility is by 
incineration, however the use of hydrolysis is still under 
consideration.  The problem with hydrolysis, noted Reeps, is 
that it could lead to the production of Schedule 1 chemicals 
that would generate additional requirements. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Reeps provided more detail on the technical 
discussions, stating that he provided his interlocutors with 
material on the requirements for the Libyan declaration, 
including information on facility agreements.  With regard to 
industrial issues, the Libyans have an "interesting 
interpretation" of the requirements of Article 6 of the CWC 
(activities not prohibited under the Convention).  Reeps said 
that the best guess now is that there will not be much 
industry-related work in Libya, with only 3-4 facilities 
possibly coming under the CWC.  The team also discussed the 
requirements for establishing a national authority, where the 
Libyans again seem to be well informed.  Reeps then provided 
information on the February 16 visit to Libya, including a 
detailed information sheet that has been FAXed to AC/CB. 
 
¶9.  (C)  With regard to the inspection, Reeps said that the 
Libyan declaration is due on March 6.  After having a few 
days to assess the document, he thought that the inspection 
team would depart for Tripoli on March 10.  The composition 
of the team would still be determined, but with the focus on 
three particular storage facilities, the team hoped to be 
able to complete its work by around March 20 so that the DG 
could provide a report to the Executive Council.  Should that 
not be the case, they will provide an interim report that the 
DG could utilize with the Council. 
 
¶10.  (C)  The DG added that the Libyan interlocutors were 
well aware of the importance of the decision that had been 
taken and stated that it is irreversible.  They also 
commented that they recognized the importance of having other 
countries follow their example, and specifically cited Egypt 
as a country that might be brought around to a 
reconsideration of its views of the CWC in light of the 
Libyan decision. 
 
¶11.  (U)  Javits sends. 
SOBEL