This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR DS/DSS/OSAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC KSAC
SUBJECT: ANNUAL OSAC CRIME/SAFETY REPORTS 
 
REF: STATE 01947 
 
The American Embassy in Colombo, Sri Lanka submits the 
following 2004 Crime and Safety Report for the Overseas 
Security Council (OSAC): 
 
¶I.  Overall Crime and Safety Situation: 
 
While Sri Lanka has a high crime rate, relatively little 
crime has been directed against the Embassy Community 
residing in Colombo.  Visitors or residents should not be 
lulled into a false sense of security, however.  In recent 
months Post has noticed an increase in violent crimes in 
Colombo, although foreigners have not been the targets of 
these crimes.   Routine petty crime (i.e. pickpockets, theft 
from hotel rooms etc.) can happen if the traveler fails to 
take appropriate personal safeguards.  Street hustlers are 
common around the hotels, shopping centers and tourist sites. 
 The Regional Security Office has received reports from 
American tourists who have fallen victim to street hustlers. 
Visiting American businessmen have reported several instances 
of threats, intimidation, and/or property confiscation over 
business deals gone sour. 
 
II.  Political Violence: 
 
After nearly 20 years of fighting between the Government of 
Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), 
the cease-fire signed in February 2002 appears to be holding. 
 However, isolated incidents of violence continue to occur in 
the northern and eastern provinces.  The U.S. Government 
still designates the LTTE as a Foreign Terrorist Organization 
(FTO). 
 
In the past, the LTTE has not specifically targeted foreign 
visitors or American interests.  Past actions by the LTTE, 
however, demonstrate that the potential for accidental 
involvement of foreigners does not deter LTTE terrorist 
actions.  Americans have been injured as innocent bystanders 
during LTTE attacks.  In recent months there have been 
clashes between Muslims and the LTTE in the Eastern Province. 
 
 
Partisan political demonstrations do occur with some 
regularity.  The main political parties, the United National 
Party and the People,s Alliance, have some mercurial 
supporters, and their demonstrations can turn violent.  While 
the rallies and demonstrations staged by major parties focus 
on domestic issues, extreme Buddhist, far leftist, and 
radical Islamic groups have staged demonstrations directed 
against Western, and specifically, American interests.  In 
the past years, local interests with some outside support 
organized demonstrations against the United States for 
various reasons including its support for Israel, its 
involvement in the Peace Process, and Operation Iraqi 
Freedom.  Since November 2003, radical Buddhists have 
attacked and damaged over a dozen Christian churches 
throughout Sri Lanka. 
 
Demonstrations are usually publicized in advance in the local 
newspapers but not always in the English print or television. 
 Demonstrations can occur in all parts of Sri Lanka, 
particularly in Colombo.  Depending on the nature of the 
protest, the most common venues for demonstrations in Colombo 
are the Fort Railroad Station or the area around Town Hall. 
Police presence is usually good, and the police presence 
usually succeeds in preventing the demonstration from 
becoming violent. 
 
III.  Post Specific Concerns: 
 
Official Americans traveling to the Northern and Eastern 
Provinces must first receive permission from the Embassy. 
Visitors should contact the Regional Security Office prior to 
traveling in these areas. 
 
Driving in Sri Lanka is an arduous task.  With poorly 
maintained roads and heavy traffic, the likelihood of being 
involved in a traffic accident is high.  Vehicles drive on 
the left side of the road, which can be a problem for drivers 
who have only driven in the United States.  Visitors should 
consider hiring a car and driver.  If visitors choose to 
drive they should use caution since immediate medical care 
for traumatic injuries is unavailable in most parts of the 
country. 
 
IV.  Police Response: 
 
Police response to criminal incidents is fair.  If an 
American citizen is the victim of a crime, he or she should 
immediately contact the police and the Consular or Regional 
Security Office at the embassy.  The general emergency 
telephone number to contact the police in Colombo is 
243-3333.  When outside Colombo, first dial "011" followed by 
the seven-digit number.  This number will allow contact with 
police headquarters, who will then forward the emergency call 
to the nearest police unit.  If the police detain an American 
citizen, he or she should immediately contact the Consular 
Section at the U.S. Embassy in Colombo.  (See section VII). 
¶V.  Medical Emergencies: 
Emergency medical care throughout Sri Lanka is below the 
standard of care in the United States.  After a nearly twenty 
year war, hospitals in Colombo have gained experience 
handling traumatic injuries and provide reasonable emergency 
treatment.  Hospitals outside Colombo do not provide the same 
level of care.  Most serious follow-up treatment will require 
medical evacuation to another country.   The Consular section 
maintains a list of medical facilities and doctors. 
Travelers to Sri Lanka are encouraged to purchase a travel 
insurance policy that covers medical evacuations. 
 
Medical institutions used by the embassy are as follows: 
 
Apollo Hospital, 578 Evitigala Mawatha, Colombo 5, Sri Lanka, 
phone 453-0000. 
 
Nawaloka Hospital, 23 Sri Saugathodaya Mawatha, Colombo 2, 
Sri Lanka, phone 230-4444 or 230-4455.  Nawaloka Hospital has 
a cardiac care unit. 
 
Asiri Hospital, 181 Kirula Road, Colombo 5, Sri Lanka, phone 
250-0608 or 259-3929. 
 
National Hospital, Regent Street, Colombo 8, Sri Lanka, phone 
269-1111. 
 
Local ambulance service is usually available through the 
hospitals. 
 
Air medical evacuation service is available through "SOS 
International", based in Singapore.  When dialing from Sri 
Lanka, dial 00-656-338-9277.  This is the direct number to 
the SOS International office. 
 
VI.  Tips on How to Avoid Becoming a Victim: 
 
Travelers to Sri Lanka should have a safe and enjoyable 
visit, if they exercise a common sense approach to their 
personal protection.  Sri Lanka is rebuilding its tourist 
industry and the police have been responsive when tourists 
become victims of crime.  Be wary of street hustlers and only 
use services recommended/provided by your hotel or approved 
by the Sri Lankan Board of Tourism.  It should be noted that 
there are severe penalties for drug related crimes, which 
apply to both Sri Lankan citizens and foreigners. 
 
Travelers should avoid all political rallies and 
demonstrations. 
 
VII. For Further Information: 
 
The Embassy is located at 210 Galle Road, Colombo 3, Sri 
Lanka.  The Embassy can be contacted during work hours at 
94-11-244-8007 or after hours at 244-8601.  If calling from 
Sri Lanka but you are outside Colombo, first dial "011", 
followed by the seven-digit number. 
 
An OSAC Country Council for Sri Lanka is in the process of 
being formed in 2004.  The American Chamber of Commerce in 
Colombo is located at the Colombo Hilton, 3rd. Floor, Lotus 
Road, Colombo 1, and can be contacted at 94-11-233-6073/4 or 
254-4644 ext. 2318; fax 233-6072 and email at 
amcham@itmin.com. 
 
Travelers are encouraged to review the latest consular 
information sheet before coming to Sri Lanka.  The sheet is 
available by calling the Department of State at (202) 
647-5225 or by visiting the web site at www.travel.state.gov. 
 Once in Sri Lanka, American citizen travelers are encouraged 
to register with the Embassy,s Consular section. 
LUNSTEAD