This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

250857Z Feb 04UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 COLOMBO 000307 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (CAMP, DEAN, WALLER) SA/PD (REINCKENS, LSCENSNY, 
HROGERS, STRYKER; SSA/PAS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP PREL CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  Sri Lanka Co-Chairs Meeting in 
Washington Draws Little Editorial Comment 
 
REF:  COLOMBO 271 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  While media reaction to the statement 
Washington released after the 2/17 Sri Lanka co-chairs 
meeting was headline heavy, editorial comment was limited. 
All major English, Sinhala and Tamil Sri Lankan media 
outlets reported on the post-meeting statement with 
straightforward headlines.  Election fever, particularly 
the emergence of a slate of candidates composed solely of 
Buddhist monks, (and supported by extremist nationalist 
party Jathika Hela Urumaya - formerly called Sihala 
Urumaya), occupied newspaper commentators.  As a result, 
only one independent Tamil daily and the government-owned 
English daily offered commentary.  Independent Tamil daily 
VIRAKESARI commented (2/21), "...The international 
community is not going to be worried who wins the election. 
But, they expect those coming to power to establish lasting 
peace.  This is the only way to obtain financial assistance 
from the international community."  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  All major English, Sinhala and Tamil Sri Lankan 
media outlets reported on the meeting outcome with 
straightforward headlines.  Government-owned (and President 
Kumaratunga-controlled) English DAILY NEWS reported (2/19), 
"Donors will continue aid flow to Lanka," and its Tamil 
sister THINAKARAN elaborated (2/19), "Donor countries re- 
affirm USD 4.5 billion aid for SL - Washington Confab 
decides that the peace process should not be affected." 
Government-owned Sinhala daily DINAMINA echoed (2/19), 
"Donor countries decide to continue help for Sri Lanka." 
Government-owned Rupavahini Television reported (2/18), 
"Sri Lanka donor co-chairs say no situation has arisen in 
the island which would prevent the granting of aid," in 
English, Sinhala and Tamil broadcasts. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Independent media outlets stressed that aid would 
continue, provided the peace process continues. 
Independent English DAILY MIRROR reported (2/19), "Donors 
affirm aid pledged - On condition peace process 
progresses."  Independent Sinhala daily LANKADEEPA observed 
(2/19), "Disappointment over collapse of cohabitation; 450 
billion aid only on progress of peace process,"  while 
independent Tamil daily VIRAKESARI's lead headline 
comforted (2/19), "America and donor countries want peace 
talks resumed - assure continued humanitarian aid." 
 
¶4.  (U)  Pro-LTTE media outlets were also straightforward 
in their reporting of the co-chairs statement.  Under the 
headline (2/18), "Donors call for early return to Peace 
Talks," pro-LTTE website TAMILNET carried the entirety of 
the statement.  Pro-LTTE Tamil daily SUDAR OLI reported 
(2/19), "'Assure free and peaceful election' - request to 
Sri Lankan leaders at the Washington Meeting." 
 
¶5.  (U)   Election fever, particularly the emergence of a 
slate of candidates composed solely of Buddhist monks, (and 
supported by extremist nationalist party Jathika Hela 
Urumaya - formerly called Sihala Urumaya), occupied 
newspaper commentators.  As a result, only one independent 
Tamil daily and the government-owned English daily offered 
commentary. Independent Tamil daily VIRAKESARI commented 
(2/21), "...The international community is not going to be 
worried who wins the election. But, they expect those 
coming to power to establish lasting peace.  This is the 
only way to obtain financial assistance from the 
international community." 
 
-----  Under the headline, "No peace means no financial 
assistance, " independent Tamil daily VIRAKESARI commented 
(2/21), "...The international community is not going to be 
worried who wins the election. But, they expect those 
coming to power to establish lasting peace.  This is the 
only way to obtain financial assistance from the 
international community." 
 
Editorial excerpts. 
 
Peace talks have stalled since April last year and now we 
face an election as a result of the executive presidential 
powers.  In the meantime, donors to Sri Lanka met in 
Washington and have requested that the peace talks be 
resumed to establish permanent peace in the country.  They 
have also informed that the financial assistance will be 
provided based on the progress of the talks.  There's no 
point in granting financial assistance if there's no peace, 
as development cannot be undertaken if there's war.  It is 
unfortunate that the humanitarian assistance meant for 
those affected by the war is on hold.  Anyway, the donors 
had assured that the humanitarian assistance would 
continue..  The international community is not going to be 
worried who wins the election. But, they expect those 
coming to power to establish lasting peace.  This is the 
only way to obtain financial assistance from the 
international community. 
End editorial excerpts. 
 
-----  Under the headline, "Election promises," independent 
Tamil daily VIRAKESARI commented (2/23), "The US Deputy 
Secretary of State has spoken to the leaders of both main 
 
SIPDIS 
parties, and stressed the need for peace...  Then only the 
country will be able to obtain the financial assistance 
from the international community for reconstruction and 
development." 
 
Editorial excerpts. 
 
With the election announcement, crossovers, violence, new 
alliances and election promises have started to come out. 
All the promises that are given on the election platform 
regarding peace, democracy, and human rights go with the 
wind after elections.  At the last elections peace was the 
victor..  If the country wants to develop economically, 
peace is essential.  There are accusations that the 
international community is involved in the internal affairs 
of our country.  But, as a developing nation we need the 
support of the international community.  The US Deputy 
Secretary of State has spoken to the leaders of both main 
 
SIPDIS 
parties, and stressed the need for peace.  He has said that 
the war must not begin, but that peace should be 
established, and that the peace talks should continue. 
Then only the country will be able to obtain the financial 
assistance from the international community for 
reconstruction and development. 
 
End editorial excerpts. 
 
-----  Under the headline, "Peace prospects undimmed," 
Government-owned English DAILY NEWS commented (2/20), "In 
what could be considered a vote of confidence in Sri Lanka, 
the international community has, once again, decided not to 
hinder the aid flow to Sri Lanka, while re-expressing the 
prime condition that substantial aid will remain tied to 
significant progress in the peace process, which is, of 
course, at present in a state of partial paralysis... " 
Editorial excerpts. 
In what could be considered a vote of confidence in Sri 
Lanka, the international community has, once again, decided 
not to hinder the aid flow to Sri Lanka, while re- 
expressing the prime condition that substantial aid will 
remain tied to significant progress in the peace process, 
which is, of course, at present in a state of partial 
paralysis... Simultaneously almost, President Kumaratunga 
was quoted saying at a public function that a future 
government under her would in no way compel the LTTE or 
give it cause to get back to war. On the contrary, the LTTE 
would be encouraged to get into the democratic mainstream, 
through the working out of a political solution to the 
ethnic conflict. Thus has the donor community's faith in 
Sri Lanka been justified. While some mischievous elements 
have thought it best to play on public fears over a future 
return to hostilities, the President's words are proof that 
no such thing is on the cards. This is substantial evidence 
that the present peace will hold and that every effort 
would be made to negotiate a solution to the ethnic 
problem. However, it would be essential that the President 
receives a clear and unambiguous mandate to launch a fresh 
peace bid and to take Lanka along the development path...It 
is best that the country sees what is in store for it, as 
it weighs its options. The ceasefire is remaining largely 
unaffected but the ethnic conflict is still to be resolved. 
Every lost moment is a virtual victory for those opposing 
peace. The challenge consists in convincingly answering the 
LTTE's ISGA proposals. As long as the latter remains 
unanswered, the Lankan State could be faulted as the party 
which is dragging its feet...It is only fair that if the 
President is willing to work for peace she be afforded an 
opportunity to do so. Meanwhile, political duplicity should 
be shunned by all relevant parties to the conflict. 
 
End editorial excerpts. 
 
Lunstead