This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 000401 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2014 
TAGS: PREL PTER KPAL IS SA IZ JO
SUBJECT: KING ABDULLAH ON IRAQ, MEPP, SAUDI ARABIA WITH 
SENATE STAFFDEL 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward Gnehm for reason 1.5d 
 
-------- 
Summary 
--------- 
 
¶1. (C) King Abdullah addressed his concerns on Iraq, the 
Palestinian-Israeli peace process and Saudi Arabia in a 
meeting with Staffdel Nordquist on January 13.  The King 
voiced concerns over the U.S. timetable in Iraq, in-fighting 
in the Palestinian Prime Ministry, and extremists in Saudi 
Arabia.  End Summary. 
 
------ 
Iraq 
------ 
 
¶2.  (C) King Abdullah asked that the U.S. be "realistic" in 
assessing its planned timetable in Iraq leading to a transfer 
of sovereignty by July 2004.  He feared that this timetable 
and an early withdrawal of U.S. forces may increase 
instability.  He believed that the U.S. has a "false sense of 
security" in the south, while shi'a are quietly organizing 
for the future.  In addressing the issue of Iraqi leadership, 
he was not convinced that the Iraq Governing Council (IGC) is 
working in the best interests for the future and that some 
IGC members are serving for personal reasons.  He described 
the prospects for liberal democracy as a "bit unrealistic" 
and reiterated his desire to see Iraqi police trained and 
serving in Iraq as quickly as possible. 
 
---------------- 
Israel/Palestine 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) The King described Jordan's current strategy in the 
peace process as "damage control".  He criticized PM Qurai 
for the in-fighting in the PNA.  He said that Sharon wants 
peace and a Palestinian state but criticized Sharon's 
delaying tactics.  The GOJ's role is to "push the envelope" 
to strengthen PM Qurai to make negotiations more even-handed. 
 He believes that President Bush is engaged but needs 
something tangible to work with. 
 
-------------- 
Saudi Arabia 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) The King expressed deep concern over extremism in 
Saudi Arabia and questioned whether the Gulf states could 
handle instability there.  He characterized Crown Prince 
Abdullah as very sincere in his efforts to combat extremists, 
but said the extremists are better-organized and have the 
sympathy of the majority of the population.  He wondered if 
the recent assassination attempt against a Saudi intel 
service head was the "next stage of confrontation" and if the 
situation could deteriorate into open rebellion or civil war. 
 He pledged his continued support for the Crown Prince. 
 
---------------------------------- 
More on Israel/Palestine and Iraq 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) In separate meetings, House Speaker Abd al-Hadi Majali 
told the Senate staffers that the U.S. is to blame for 
injustice in the peace process, and that he did not 
understand why the Isrealis have the "full backing" of the 
U.S. in building "the wall".  Senate President Rifai seconded 
the King's desire to have Iraqi police serving in Iraq and 
Majali's criticism of the security wall in Israel. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified website at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM