This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 DJIBOUTI 000061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/IP, DS/IP/AF, AF/E, AF/EX 
NAIROBI FOR COM AND RSO 
ADDIS ABABA FOR COM AND RSO 
AMSARA FOR COM AND RSO 
CJTF HOA FOR COMMAND STAFF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/14/2014 
TAGS: ASEC AEMR CASC
SUBJECT: DJIBOUTI: TRIP WIRES 
 
 
Classified By: RSO Marc Ramos for Reason 1.5 (D) AND (G) 
 
¶1. (C) Post held an executive meeting of the Emergency Action 
Committee on 01/10/2004 to discuss recent threat activity in 
the region and what measures to take in response to a 
particular threat.  The executive EAC was composed of the 
Charge' d'Affaires, RSO, COS, USLO and Consular Officer. 
 
¶2. (C) The EAC discussed potential threats as outlined in 
recent intelligence reports.  RSO and COS continue to work 
closely with Host Nation and US Military counterparts to 
mitigate any threat, but the EAC does not feel at this time 
that an increase in security services is needed.  US Military 
personnel continue to take appropriate measures in accordance 
with their standard operating procedures. 
 
¶3. (C) In light of recent intelligence, the EAC reviewed 
current Trip Wires for Post and updated them accordingly. 
Due to Post's small size and its unique situation, (having a 
US Military base less than a 10 minute drive from the 
Embassy) the EAC adjusted the levels and actions taking into 
consideration the ability of the US Military to assist in a 
crisis situation.  Listed below is a break down of levels and 
actions that Post will use as a guide to respond to an 
emergency situation.  This model has been taken from the Trip 
Wires Guidance published by the Office of Crisis Management 
Support and has been modified to fit Post needs. 
 
LEVEL ONE SITUATION ) A noticeable change in the country 
situation has been brought to the attention of the EAC. 
Level One changes would be on the order of those described 
below, although not limited to those listed. 
 
-     Sporadic incidences of student/social unrest focused at 
US facilities and personnel 
-     Increased threat reporting against U.S. and/or Western 
government facilities and or frequented soft targets 
-     Increased surveillance of Embassy housing or personnel 
-     Volcano lava flows seen regularly with puffs of smoke 
from crater 
-     Increase, frequency and magnitude of seismic activity 
-     Significant increase in crime 
-     Hyper-inflation or International Loan payment defaults 
-     Regional fighting in the region creates large refugee 
flow (Eritrea/Ethiopia conflict) 
 
LEVEL ONE ACTIONS - Post has experienced Level I situations 
since the spring of 2002.  Post has held various EAC meetings 
to assess developments, discuss draw down options, and 
recommend actions to post and the Department.  Post has 
upgraded security measures and has taken, and/or will take as 
needed, the following steps to mitigate the threat: 
 
-     Meet with host government officials and contacts to 
gather information, express concern, request additional 
security, and plan for emergency assistance, as appropriate 
-     Review personnel security arrangements at the office, 
in transit, and at home 
-     Review upcoming events with employees and family members 
-     Offer use of voluntary Separate Maintenance Allowance 
or R&R/Home Leave orders for family members 
-     Review F-77 Report of Potential Evacuees for accuracy 
-     Request clearance from CA/OCS for EAC-approved language 
for Warden Message or Public Announcement to describe current 
situation to the public 
-     Encourage Embassy registration for Amcits 
-     Conduct post-driven Crisis Management Exercise 
-     Review & Update Emergency Action Plan and checklists 
 
LEVEL TWO SITUATION ) Problems in the country have become 
chronic or permanent, or the host country has difficulty 
managing the situation.  Level Two changes in situation would 
be on the order of those described below, although not 
limited to those listed. (A confluence or combination of 
specific events would be a precursor to requesting authorized 
departure) 
 
-     Protesters periodically block main roads, 
demonstrations are frequent and large 
-     Violent rhetoric increasingly directed toward 
international community 
-     Western interests (businesses, schools, cultural 
centers) threatened or attacked 
-     Seismic activity leaves residences uninhabitable 
-     Sporadic incidents of looting, growing criminal activity 
-     Stores close due to lack of stock, lack of cash 
-     Indications of a negative change in Host Nation support 
for the Global War on Terrorism 
 
LEVEL TWO ACTIONS - Post has held various EAC meetings to 
assess developments, discuss draw down options, and recommend 
actions to post and the Department.  Post has upgraded 
security measures and has taken, and/or will take as needed, 
the following steps to mitigate the threat: 
-     Meet with host government officials and contacts to 
gather information, express concern, request additional 
security, plan for emergency assistance, as appropriate. 
Determine the willingness and ability of host government to 
assist with securing personnel and facilities 
-     Consider reducing Embassy operating hours and services 
or temporarily close to the public, except for emergency 
American citizen services 
-     Review Mission staffing patterns; identify emergency 
personnel and position 
-     Review F-77 Report of Potential Evacuees, update if 
necessary 
-     Review online Evacuation Manual templates for 
processing personnel in case of Authorized Departure 
-     Submit EAC language to Department for clearance of a 
Public Announcement or Travel Warning to advise the public of 
current situation or any change in status 
-     Test Warden systems (official and private Amcit 
networks) 
-     Hold periodic town meetings with American community; 
encourage Embassy registration for Amcits 
-     Test alternate command center & radio networks 
-     Review evacuation routes and transportation options, 
verify commercial air schedules 
-     Review with Consular and Management Officers the papers 
needed to document U.S. employees and family members and to 
return to the U.S. or alternate safe haven 
-     Consider cancellation of large scale social functions 
and group activities 
-     Consider travel restrictions for U.S. government 
employees and limit TDY visits to case by case basis with an 
emphasis on the needs of the Mission 
-     Review security for USG personnel and facilities; 
Enhance security posture with increased local guard and 
Police presence, roving patrols and Surveillance Detection 
Teams 
-     Review & Update Emergency Action Plan and checklists 
-     Review burn time and drill on SOP,s 
-     Begin contingency planning with US Military in country 
 
LEVEL THREE SITUATION ) Changes in the country situation are 
widespread, permanent, target U.S. citizens or U.S. 
interests.  The host country is unwilling or unable to manage 
basic services and security needs.  Post requests authorized 
departure for unessential personnel and dependents.  Level 
Three changes in situation would be on the order of those 
described below, although not limited to those listed. (A 
confluence or combination of specific events would be a 
precursor to requesting ordered departure) 
 
-     Police unwilling or unable to prevent large scale 
violent demonstrations 
-     Protesters target U.S. Embassy, American community 
and/or American businesses 
-     Marked decrease in availability of commercial air 
traffic 
-     Terrorist attacks against U.S. or other targets 
attempted/thwarted 
-     Western diplomat attacked or assassinated 
-     Access to American Embassy compound temporarily blocked 
by protests 
-     Infectious disease epidemic 
-     Impact of disaster on capital city includes depleted or 
interrupted supplies of gasoline, water, food, utility 
services 
-     Country infrastructure unable to handle clean-up and 
repair of services 
-     Crime causes restriction in travel at night or in 
certain areas 
-     Severe shortage of basic necessities (food, water, 
fuel, power) 
-     Police cannot prevent massive looting, including in 
diplomatic residential area 
 
LEVEL THREE ACTIONS ) Post will hold an EAC meeting to 
assess developments, discuss draw down options, and recommend 
actions to post and the Department.  Post leadership will 
request Authorized Departure for Eligible Family Members and 
non-emergency personnel.  Post will consider a recommendation 
to the Department for Ordered Departure.  Possible EAC 
recommendations at Level Three are listed below. 
 
-     Meet with host government officials and contacts to 
gather information, express concern, request additional 
security, plan for emergency assistance, as appropriate. 
Determine the willingness and ability of host government to 
assist with securing personnel and facilities 
-     Consider reduced Embassy operating hours and services 
or temporarily close to the public, except for emergency 
American citizen services 
-     Review Mission staffing patterns; identify emergency 
personnel and positions 
-     Review F-77 Report of Potential Evacuees, update if 
necessary 
-     Review with Consular and Management Officers the papers 
needed to document U.S. employees and family members and to 
return to the U.S. or alternate safe haven 
-     Review online Evacuation Manual templates for 
processing personnel for Authorized Departure and in case of 
Ordered Departure of non-emergency personnel and all EFM,s 
-     Submit EAC language to Department for clearance of a 
Travel Warning to advise the public of current situation 
and/or if post status changes 
-     Develop Press Guidance for host country media and for 
Department to use, specific to post situation 
-     Test Warden systems (official and private Amcit 
networks) 
-     Hold periodic town meetings with American community, 
continue to register Amcits 
-     Test alternate command center & radio networks 
-     Review evacuation routes and transportation options, 
verify commercial air schedules 
-     Cancel social functions and group activities 
-     Institute travel restrictions for remaining U.S. 
government employees 
-     Provide security escorts for personnel 
-     RSO reviews residential housing patterns; possibly 
consolidates official residences 
-     Curtail TDY visits 
-     Review security for all USG personnel and facilities; 
Enhance security posture with increased local guard presence, 
roving patrols and Surveillance Detection Teams 
-     Request security assistance from regional USMC FAST 
detachment out of Bahrain 
-     Put into effect Emergency Action Plan 
 
LEVEL FOUR SITUATION ) Changes in the country situation are 
widespread, permanent, and target U.S. citizens or U.S. 
interests.  The host country is unwilling or unable to manage 
basic services and security needs.  Post and the Department 
concur about reducing the number of USG personnel.  Posts 
recommends ordered departure.  Level Four changes in 
situation would be on the order of those described below, 
although not limited to those listed. 
 
-     Large city under rebel control 
-     Security forces unwilling/unable to control violent 
demonstrations 
-     Successful and violent attacks on Government; Any sign 
of bombings is a problem near Mission facilities 
-     Anti-U.S. rhetoric widespread, U.S. blamed for problems 
in host country 
-     Authorities unresponsive or unavailable to respond to 
Embassy requests for assistance 
-     Attacks directly target U.S. Embassy compound 
-     Airports close; Key international airlines stop 
providing service 
-     French medical resources overwhelmed or non-existent 
-     French Military and Ex-Pat community draws down due to 
current situation 
 
LEVEL FOUR ACTIONS ) Post will hold an EAC meeting to assess 
developments, discuss draw down options, and recommend 
actions to post and the Department.  Post will recommend 
Ordered Departure and a relocation of essential staff to US 
Military base.  Possible EAC recommendations at Level Four 
are listed below. 
 
-     Meet with host government officials and contacts to 
gather information, express concern, request additional 
security, plan for emergency assistance, as appropriate. 
Determine the willingness and ability of host government to 
assist with securing personnel and facilities 
-     Reduce Embassy operating hours and services or 
temporarily close to the public, except for emergency 
American citizen services 
-     Review Mission staffing patterns, identify core 
emergency personnel/positions 
-     Review F-77 Report of Potential Evacuees, update if 
necessary 
-     Review with Consular and Management Officers the papers 
needed to document U.S. employees and family members and to 
return to the US or alternate safe haven 
-     Consult with M/FLO for services to evacuated personnel, 
employment, schools, housing, etc. 
-     Review online Evacuation Manual templates for 
processing personnel for Ordered Departure 
-     Submit EAC language to Department for clearance of a 
Travel Warning to advise the public of current situation 
and/or if post status changes 
-     Draft Press Guidance for local media and submit to 
Department for post-specific language about the evacuation 
-     Test Warden systems (official and private Amcit 
networks) 
-     Hold periodic town meetings with American community, 
continue to register Amcits 
-     Establish alternate command center & radio networks 
-     Review evacuation routes and transportation options, 
verify commercial air schedules, maintain close touch with 
commercial carriers 
-     Continue to review options for air charter and ground 
transportation 
-     Cancel social functions and group activities 
-     Travel restrictions for remaining U.S. government 
employees 
-     Provide security escorts for personnel 
-     RSO reviews residential housing patterns.  Consolidate 
staff residences or consider moving all personnel onto the 
Embassy compound or US Military base. 
-     Curtail TDY visitors 
-     Review security for USG personnel and facilities; 
Enhance security posture with US Military assistance 
-     Put into effect Emergency Action Plan and checklists 
 
LEVEL FIVE SITUATION ) Post suspends operations due to 
full-scale war or other catastrophic event.  Due to Post size 
and the presence of US Military Forces in country, Post, in 
consultation with the Department, will consider maintaining 
minimal operations from US Military base dependant upon the 
type and size of the catastrophic event. 
 
¶4. (U) POC is RSO Marc Ramos at 253-35-39-95 ext.2307 or 
RamosMA@State.SGOV.GOV 
SMITH