This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (CAMP, DEAN, WALLER); SA/PD (REINCKENS, SCENSNY, 
STRYKER); SSA/PAS 
 
E.O.12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP PREL CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY - SECRETARY POWELL'S LETTERS TO 
PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER CREATE MEDIA SPLASH OVER THE 
WEEKEND 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Secretary Powell's letters to Prime Minister 
Wickremesinghe and President Kumaratunga were front page 
news over the weekend.  English and vernacular headlines 
implied that the Secretary was critical of the President; 
one English weekly reported, "End political infighting CBK 
told - Powell writes to CBK, Ranil."  The Tamil press 
concentrated on the President's alleged negative reaction to 
Powell's letters.  Editorial reaction focused on 
international involvement in Sri Lanka's political scene and 
was generally positive.  One Tamil editorialist interpreted 
the Secretary's letters as evidence of "international 
pressure against the actions of the President which disrupt 
the peace process," while one English daily's editorial was 
more general, "...let us be humble enough in the interest of 
our own future and welcome with open arms international 
mediation from countries like [the] USA, India and UK..." 
Sinhala newspaper editorialists were silent.  End Summary. 
 
----- 
Headlines 
----- 
 
¶2.  Headlines about Secretary of State Colin Powell's 
letters to Prime Minister Wickremesinghe and President 
Kumaratunga were splashed across English and vernacular 
weekend newspapers.  Independent English weekly, SUNDAY 
LEADER led with (1/4), "End political infighting CBK told - 
Powell writes to CBK, Ranil."  Independent English weekly, 
SUNDAY ISLAND elaborated (1/4), "Powell writes to both 
leaders, India too working 'overtime' - US mounts further 
pressure on CBK and Ranil to resolve political crisis." 
Independent Sinhala weekly, SUNDAY LANKADEEPA headlined 
(1/4),"Settle internal clashes if you want peace and aid, US 
State Secretary tells President, PM in writing,"  while 
independent Sinhala daily, DIVAINA's 1/5 headline reported, 
"America urges immediate union of Chandrika and Ranil in 
order to solve crisis in Sri Lanka."  Independent English 
weekly, SUNDAY TIMES was more evenhanded: "US urges 
President, PM to settle differences," and independent Tamil 
weekly, SUNDAY THINAKKURAL's headline was tamer still (1/4): 
"Letters from Collin Powell to the President and the Prime 
Minister." 
 
¶3.  On January 5, the Tamil press concentrated on the 
President's allegedly negative reaction to Powell's letters 
(as reported septel, in fact the President was not negative 
in her discussions with the Ambassador after he handed over 
the Secretary's letter).  Independent Tamil daily, 
THINAKKURAL reported (1/5), "The President is not likely to 
pay attention to US interference," while independent Tamil 
daily, VIRAKESARI elucidated (1/5), "The President is 
unhappy with the US. warning." 
 
----- 
Editorials 
----- 
¶4.  Editorial reaction focused on international involvement 
in Sri Lanka's political scene and was generally positive. 
One Tamil editorialist interpreted the Secretary's letters 
as evidence of "international pressure against the actions 
of the President which disrupt the peace process," while one 
English daily's editorial was more general, "...let us be 
humble enough in the interest of our own future and welcome 
with open arms international mediation from countries like 
[the] USA, India and UK..."  Sinhala newspaper editorialists 
were silent. 
 
 -- Under the headline (1/5), "American pressure for peace," 
independent Tamil daily THINAKKURAL approvingly commented, 
"While the pressure put forward by the US clearly shows the 
US interest in solving the ethnic problem it can be 
considered as pressure representing the international 
community." 
 
Editorial excerpts. 
 
The President is aware that the peace process cannot move 
even an inch forward the without the joint effort of both 
main political parties.  But she goes her own way.  Prime 
Minister Ranil Wickremasinghe, even with a parliamentary 
majority, cannot do anything to go forward.  The observers 
have come to a conclusion that the ways of both these 
leaders cannot be changed.  America has stated its stand 
regarding the political crisis between the President and the 
Prime Minister.  US Secretary of State Colin Powell has 
written separate letters to both leaders. While the pressure 
put forward by the US clearly shows the US interest in 
solving the ethnic problem it can be considered as pressure 
representing the international community. 
 
End excerpts. 
 
-- Under the headline (1/5), "International pressure against 
Chandrika," pro-LTTE Tamil daily SUDAR OLI, referring to 
Secretary Powell's letter to President Kumaratunga, 
 
SIPDIS 
commented, "It is also understood that the letter to the 
President has made it clear that the political crisis should 
not affect the peace process.  This shows the international 
pressure against the actions of the President which disrupt 
the peace process." 
 
Editorial excerpts. 
 
It is two months since the President took over the three 
ministries, which brought uncertainty into the peace 
process. The two forces, one under the President and the 
other under the LTTE, honoring the ceasefire during this 
period is great. The President's take over of the Defense 
Ministry that endangered the environment for peace has come 
under heavy condemnation of the international community. The 
US Deputy Secretary of State had expressed his views that 
the political crisis created in Colombo, while the Prime 
Minister was away in the US, has affected the peace process. 
It is understood that the US Secretary of State Collin 
Powell has sent separate letters to the President and the 
Prime Minister on Friday through the US Ambassador in 
Colombo urging both leaders to resume peace efforts, 
assuring its support for peace.  It is also understood that 
the letter to the President has made it clear that the 
political crisis should not affect the peace process.  This 
shows the international pressure against the actions of the 
President which disrupt the peace process. 
 
End excerpts. 
 
--Under the headline, "Welcome international mediation," 
independent English DAILY MIRROR commented, "...let us be 
humble enough in the interest of our own future and welcome 
with open arms international mediation from countries like 
[the] USA, India and UK..." 
 
Editorial excerpts. 
It is not that we are asking our leaders to cow down to the 
dictates of Washington or any other country in arriving at a 
just settlement....  let us be humble enough in the interest 
of our own future and welcome with open arms international 
mediation from countries like [the] USA, India and UK, who 
all have either historic, regional or worldly interest in 
bringing about a permanent settlement here as they are 
certain to do a much better job in strengthening democratic 
institutions in this country for the benefit of all its 
citizens. 
 
End excerpts. 
 
LUNSTEAD