This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ACCRA 000362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR GH
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT KUFUOR ON INTERNAL SECURITY SITUATION 
 
REF: A. ACCRA 0347 
     ¶B. ACCRA 0301 
     ¶C. 03 ACCRA 2404 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Mary C. Yates, reason 1.5 (B/D). 
 
¶1. (C)   Summary. President Kufuor told the Ambassador 
February 23 that he has placed Ghanaian security forces on a 
quiet "state of alert" while he attends the AU summit in 
Tripoli.  Concern over the recent activities of former 
President Rawlings, public allegations against Kufuor's 
National Security Advisor at the National Reconciliation 
Commission, and alleged grumblings from President Compaore of 
Burkina Faso, have heightened presidential jitters.  While 
these concerns appear overblown, they do reveal the level of 
insecurity the GOG manifests when the subject is Rawlings and 
his supposed ability to make mischief for the Ghanaian 
government.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (C)  On February 23 President Kufuor invited Ambassador 
Yates to the Castle for an informal discussion on Ghana's 
internal security situation (polchief attended as notetaker). 
 Kufuor focused on his imminent departure for the AU summit 
in Tripoli, which coincided with the absence from Ghana of 
National Security Coordinator Francis Poku (in Washington for 
consultations, accompanied by our Regional Affairs Officer). 
High-profile appearances before the National Reconciliation 
Commission by former President Rawlings and, separately, 
Rawlings' long-serving security advisor Kojo Tsikata (ref B), 
had increased GOG security concerns, said Kufuor.  "We are on 
a state of alert for the next week or so," said Kufuor.  He 
asked the USG to "use its network" to "see if something is 
brewing." 
 
¶3. (C)  Kufuor referred several times to "the recent attack" 
on Poku as a threat to national security.  Kufuor appeared to 
be referring to Kojo Tsikata's statements before the NRC, 
during which he accused Poku of having supervised abusive 
interrogation sessions when Tsikata was arrested on 
coup-plotting charges in the mid-1970s (the bulk of Tsikata's 
testimony concerned his own role in the murder of several 
judges in the early 1980s).  Kufuor took the time to review 
the history of the overthrow of the two previous elected 
Presidents, Busia (69-72) and Limann (79-81), both toppled by 
military coup-d'etat before the end of their four year terms. 
 He said that Rawlings' NDC "knows" it cannot win the 
December elections fairly, and "hates" being in opposition. 
 
¶4. (C)  Suggestions from unnamed sources had also reached 
Kufuor, he said, that President Compaore of Burkina Faso was 
"unhappy" with Kufuor and his government.  Kufuor had no 
details, but he suggested that the "hidden hand" of Kojo 
Tsikata was evident in this potential souring of relations 
 
SIPDIS 
with Burkina Faso.  Rawlings' political party, the NDC, was 
"in contact" with the government of Burkina Faso, he said, 
and would "use anything" to injure the Kufuor Administration. 
 Tsikata (estranged from Rawlings for several years) had his 
own contacts and would not hesitate to cause trouble for the 
GOG.  Kufuor said he had tried, unsuccessfully, to reach 
Compaore by telephone, but would see him at the AU Summit and 
make a point of speaking to him. 
 
¶5. (C)  Comment.  As we said recently (ref A), we see no 
serious threat to the security of the Kufuor Administration 
from Rawlings or his supporters.  Compaore's level of 
"unhappiness" we cannot judge -- we defer to our colleagues 
in Ouagadougou.  The absence of the President and Francis 
Poku, the even-tempered director of the GOG security team, 
means that more nervous observers of the political scene, 
including President Kufuor's brother, Defense Minister 
Addo-Kufuor, may grow even more fearful about the alleged 
threat presented by Rawlings. The President seems more 
level-headed.  When the Ambassador shared with the President 
that Rawlings had invited her to meet him informally, Kufuor 
encouraged the Ambassador to do so.  We think nervousness 
within the GOG must be seen in the context of increasing 
election fever in Ghana, and political maneuvering between 
the Kufuor Administration and the opposition NDC. End 
comment. 
 
 
 
Yates