This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 000197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SENV ECON NI
SUBJECT: FEDERAL AND STATE GOVERNMENTS BATTLE FOR YANKARI 
NATIONAL PARK 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Yankari National Park is Nigeria's premier 
game, bird and plant reserve, but the GON has invested little 
money to improve park infrastructure or promote park tourism 
since assuming control of the park in the early 1980s.  Park 
officials told Econoff January 29 that the Bauchi State 
Government is intent on reclaiming the park and has allocated 
1.9 billion naira (USD 14 million) in its 2004 budget for 
Yankari improvements, while forming a committee to jointly 
manage the park with neighboring Gombe State.  The GON does 
not want to turn Yankari over to the states, but National 
Assembly members will likely introduce a bill to return the 
park to the states and demand that the GON pay Bauchi and 
Gombe (which were one state before) restitution for lost 
income since the GON assumed control of the park.  End 
Summary. 
 
Background: Positive Mismanagement? 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Yankari National Park was established as a park in 1956 
and a National Park in 1991, is the country's premier game 
reserve.  It is home to over fifty mammal species, including 
elephants, lions and leopards, with over 350 bird species and 
a myriad of fish, reptiles and plant life.  Since assuming 
control of the park in the early 1980s after alleged state 
mismanagement, the GON has invested little money into park 
infrastructure (lodging, roads, basic security, fencing), 
advertising or marketing.  Roads have not been resurfaced in 
over 20 years, park rangers lack vehicles and walkie-talkies, 
and poaching by local villagers is not controlled. 
Underdevelopment and lack of visitors has kept much of the 
park unspoiled, however, with amazing scenery, wildlife and 
natural hot springs in one of Nigeria's few wild places. 
 
Bauchi State to the Rescue 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Bauchi State Governor Ahmadu Muazu allocated 1.9 billion 
(USD 14 million) naira in the state's 2004 budget for 
rehabilitation of Yankari National Park to include new 
lodgings, reception area, equipment, security, reintroducing 
species of wildlife, and strangely a golf course.  Muazu has 
been lobbying the National Assembly to return Yankari to 
Bauchi and Gombe (which were one state when the Federal 
Government took over the park), and the two states have 
formed a committee that hopes to take control of the park 
from the GON within the next year.  Contacts in the Vice 
President's office told Econoff that the GON has no intention 
of returning Yankari to Bauchi or Gombe, because the park 
belongs to the national patrimony. 
 
Cash Cow, But Where's the Cash? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  The House of Representatives Majority Leader, Alhaji 
Abdul Ningi, is leading the efforts to return Yankari to 
Bauchi and Gombe States.  Ningi asserted that that the GON 
should pay the two states compensation for lost revenues 
since the resort was taken over by the GON.  Ningi stated 
that although Yankari's infrastructure was "in shambles and 
ramshackled," he claimed the game reserve was making "huge 
revenue every day." 
 
¶5.  According to Yankari rangers, the park has averaged an 
estimated 20,000 to 25,000 visitors per year from 1995 to 
¶2000.  Low prices in the park have made Yankari one of the 
best travel bargains in Nigeria, but they also mean the GON 
has not likely reaped huge revenues from park visitors over 
the years.  Park entrance is only USD 1.25, while lodging (as 
poor as it may be) is only USD 5 to 75 a night.  Meals cost 
only USD 2 to 3 for lunch and dinner.  A 2 hours game drive 
in the park is a mere USD 2, while a full day in the park 
with a ranger guide costs USD 10.  According to park 
management, pricing has remained unchanged over the last five 
years, even with a devalued naira.  With limited park 
revenues and a small federal stipend, Yankari is likely 
losing money for the GON. 
 
Comment: Yankari's Uncertain Future 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Kenya and South Africa have adopted two-tiered pricing 
schemes for local and international visitors, who pay two to 
three times the rate of local patrons.  Nigeria does not get 
many international tourists, and charges only one rate. 
Major hotels in Lagos and Abuja can cost between USD 190 to 
USD 250 a night, so it is amazing to find such a travel 
bargain with good service and somewhat adequate facilities. 
 
¶7.  Nonetheless, hope springs eternal for making money in 
Nigeria, and the GON likely will not give even this skinny 
"cash cow" back to the states.  With proper management and 
pricing Yankari could easily become Nigeria's premier tourist 
destination, providing jobs and revenues to the local economy 
while doing a better job of preservation.  Money and 
management attention from Bauchi and Gombe States would 
likely help Yankari, at least in the short term. 
ANYASO