This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KATHMANDU 000312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS AND DS/IP/SA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV ASEC CASC NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  MAOIST STRIKE CLOSES CENTRAL NEPAL; 
FIGHTING IN MID-WEST 
 
REF: KATHMANDU 0288 
 
¶1.  (U) The Maoist-enforced "bandh," or general strike, 
called for central Nepal, including Kathmandu, on February 17 
was well observed in the capital.  Slightly more shops were 
observed open and vehicles operating in Kathmandu than during 
the February 12 closure (Reftel).  There were few reports of 
violence in the city.  In the morning a socket bomb near a 
busy intersection in the eastern part of the city damaged two 
vehicles and blew out the windows of a local business, but no 
injuries were reported.  In the south-central district of 
Nawalaparasi, suspected Maoists killed Khem Narayan Foujdar, 
a former Nepali Congress (Democratic) member of the National 
Assembly (the Upper House of Parliament) and a district 
political chairman.  The Embassy received no bandh-related 
complaints from American citizens. 
 
¶2.  (U) According to press reports, the Royal Nepal Army 
(RNA) engaged the Maoists at Kotwada in the mid-western 
district of Kalikot in what may turn out to be the biggest 
battle since the end of the ceasefire in August.  The 
engagement, which was reported to have begun late on February 
16, continued for at least part of the following day. 
Initial fatality figures of at least 35 Maoists and 1 RNA 
officer killed may rise as more information becomes 
available.  There was some speculation that the Maoists may 
have massed in an effort to disrupt King Gyanendra's planned 
series of public receptions in the Maoist heartland (Reftel). 
 Press accounts suggest that paratroops were airlifted to the 
site to engage the Maoists. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Comment:  After an unusually long hiatus, today's 
bandh is the third for Kathmandu's generally compliant 
population in as many weeks.  Yet another closure reportedly 
is being planned for February 25-29.  This latest spate of 
bandhs, however, has not been accompanied by nearly the usual 
level of pre-strike violence (bombings, arson, sabotage) the 
Maoists typically have used to intimidate the general public 
in years past.  The marginally higher number of businesses 
open and vehicles running today could indicate that fear of 
the risk of non-compliance is beginning to fade.  With no 
notable recent victories against the security forces to their 
credit, the Maoists' press coverage has been limited of late 
to the occasional hit-and-run ambush and serial 
strike-calling.  If the Maoists move ahead with the Feb. 
25-29 strike as planned, we expect that public patience will 
not last for such an extended and costly duration. 
MALINOWSKI