This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 YEREVAN 000226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR-STHIBEAULT, EUR/PPD-MLOGSDON AND 
SRUEDY, EUR/CACEN-ESIDEREAS, EUR, EUR/ACE, EUR/SNEC, 
EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958; N/A 
TAGS: KMDR OPRC PGOV PREL KPAO AM
SUBJECT: REACTION FROM YEREVAN, ARMENIA: PRESIDENT 
BUSH'S STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: President George W. Bush's State of the 
Union Address was widely covered in Armenian media, 
both print and broadcast.  Coverage by broadcast media 
was mostly factual, using CNN, EuroNews or Russian 
sources.  Print media used the Russian Washington File 
provided by the U.S. Embassy Public Affairs Section as 
well as other Internet sources.  The main focus of the 
coverage was on the President's statements on the war 
against terror, war in Iraq, situation in the Middle 
East and immigration reform.  The following is a 
summary version of print reports. END SUMMARY 
 
U.S. PRESIDENT PROMISED TO CONTINUE WAR AGAINST TERROR 
 
¶2. Government official Armenian language daily 
HAYASTANI HANRAPETUTIUN (01/22) published a long report 
on President Bush's State of the Union address on its 
international news page.  The main focus of the 
coverage was on the President's statements on the war 
against terrorism, policy on Iraq and situation in the 
Middle East.  In a commentary the newspaper wrote: 
"President Bush hinted that the struggle against 
terrorists is conducted not only overseas, but also 
inside the U.S.  In this respect he called on the U.S 
Congress to renew the Patriot Act, which provides 
unprecedented wide authorities to the law enforcement 
agencies in the fight against terrorism." 
 
U.S. CAN ATTACK ENEMIES WITHOUT WARNING 
 
¶3. Centrist Armenian language daily AZG (01/22) placed 
a top article under the above headline on the 
international news page.  The article highlighted the 
President's statements on the war against terrorism, 
U.S. policy on Iraq, negotiations with Libya on 
eliminating weapons of mass destruction and new 
immigration reform. Commenting on the U.S. policy on 
combating terrorism, the newspaper wrote: "Delivering 
his annual State of the Union Address to Congress, 
President Bush primarily spoke about the struggle 
against terrorism, which, in his words, will be of an 
offensive nature.  The President particularly stated 
that America grants itself the right to start a war at 
any time when the security of the nation [American] is 
threatened...  `America will never ask permission for 
protecting the security of its citizens,' stated 
President Bush hinting at the oppositionist position of 
France, Germany, Russia and China in the war against 
Iraq." 
 
NEW TIMES IN THE U.S. AND OUTSIDE ITS BORDERS 
 
¶4. Oppositionist Armenian daily "ARAVOT" (01/22) 
published a long article on the second page of the 
newspaper. The main focus was on the war against 
terrorism. "In his State of the Union Address President 
Bush openly stated: America is on the offensive in the 
struggle against terrorism.  `America will never ask 
permission for protecting its citizens,' throwing 
obvious hints to France, Germany, Russia and China in 
the Iraqi war context, the President justified the new 
emphasis in U.S. foreign policy.  The President's 
annual State of the Union Address markedly differred 
from the previous ones with a special passionate 
description of things and reiteration of the U.S. role 
in the current international developments. It is easy 
to understand it - presidential elections are coming 
up, and it is not by chance that the President's 
statements were mainly built on the ideas of the 
security and prosperity of American citizens...  It is 
not secret that international terrorism has become a 
serious threat to not only the U.S. but to the entire 
civilized world community.  It is also indisputable 
that a similar threat to the world is a possible 
acquisition of WMDs by certain regressive, "Asian 
mentality" bearing countries.  Therefore, the 
international community or at least its civilized 
section should accept the new realities in the world 
and the U.S role in leading those developments." 
 
U.S WILL ATTACK ITS ENEMIES WITHOUT WARNING 
 
¶5. Pro-government Russian language newspaper NOVOYE 
VREMYA (01/22) published an article under the second 
page column "The Theme of the Day."  The article draws 
parallels between President Bush's statements delivered 
to Congress.  "Making a similar statement to Congress 
last year, Bush referred to the inevitable 
threat of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction.  Later on 
such statements about the presence of these weapons in 
Iraq became a reason for going to war with Iraq. 
Since weapons of mass destruction have not been found 
so far, Bush touched upon this issue in his current 
statement very carefully. He just mentioned that a 
group of American experts have already revealed the 
existence of weapons of mass destruction programs. Now, 
justifying the war in Iraq, he said that Libya, under 
the pressure of the war in Iraq, has agreed to scrap 
its WMD programs." 
 
ORDWAY