This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

291413Z Jan 04C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 000218 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR T, VC, AC, AC/CB, NP/CBM, VC/CCB, L/ACV, IO/S 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2014 
TAGS: PARM PREL LY CWC
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC):  U.S./U.K 
CONSULTATIONS WITH OPCW ON LIBYA 
 
 
Classified By: Eric M. Javits, Ambassador to the OPCW, for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 This is CWC-11-04. 
 
¶1.  (C)  On January 20, Under Secretary of State John Bolton 
and William Ehrman, Director-General for Defense and 
Intelligence of the U.K.'s FCO, met with the senior 
leadership of the Organization for the Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to discuss the state of activity on 
Libyan accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), 
and destruction of its CW stocks.  Accompanied by OPCW 
Ambassador Javits, U.K. Ambassador Budd and U.S./U.K. 
briefers, Ehrman informed OPCW Director General Pfirter of 
the initial contacts and discussions which led to the Dec. 19 
announcement by Libya to eliminate its WMD programs.  Ehrman 
stated that the U.S./U.K. had offered to assist Libya in the 
preparation of its declaration under the CWC,  as well as on 
destruction of its CW stocks, and that Libya had accepted the 
offer. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Pfirter noted that the Technical Secretariat (TS) 
was preparing to send experts from the Verification and other 
divisions to Libya, at the appropriate time.  He had written 
to the Libyan Ambassador in The Hague in response to the 
Libyan official note of accession to the CWC, and would meet 
with the Ambassador on January 20.  Pfirter said he would 
make the point to the Ambassador that it would be important 
for the Libyan government to make ready for an OPCW team. 
Bolton commented that the Libyans should recognize that it is 
to their advantage to be forthcoming with the OPCW.  Pfirter 
said the TS welcomes the role of the U.S. and U.K., and 
emphasized the importance of continued cooperation between 
the TS, U.S. and U.K. in dealing with Libya. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Director of Verification Reeps asked about the 
security of the Libyan CW stocks, and Bolton noted the 
importance of this issue and explained that this is one of 
the objectives of the teams on the ground now, to work with 
the Libyans to ensure security at such sites is satisfactory. 
Reeps added that he placed a high priority on ensuring the 
safety of the technical experts the TS sends to Libya, and 
the point was taken by all participants.  Ehrman commented 
that the U.S./U.K. had offered to assist in the "re-training" 
of Libyan WMD experts for work in legitimate commercial 
activities, which hopefully would make Tripoli more 
forthcoming in its discussions with all interlocutors.  He 
noted that this applied to all Libyan WMD and missile 
programs. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Reeps emphasized that it would be important to get 
as quickly as possible any information from U.S./U.K. 
officials who had visited or would visit Libya.  Bolton 
re-affirmed that the U.S. and U.K. want to share information 
with the TS, and provide any updates as appropriate.  He 
added that he thought the Libyans understood that it was in 
their interest not to have any problems with OPCW personnel. 
Reeps welcomed the U.S. and U.K. efforts on the ground as 
"complimentary," then stressed that it would be important for 
the U.S. and U.K. to help prepare the ground for the TS 
personnel who would arrive in Libya. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Turning to the declaration of CW stockpiles and 
facilities that Libya would need to declare to the OPCW by 
March 6, Reeps noted that a number of States Parties would 
have a great deal of interest in seeing the Libyan CWC 
declaration, therefore it would be important to work to make 
it as accurate as possible.  Ehrman commented that the 
U.S./U.K. had provided Libya with a paper highlighting what 
actions it needs to take and what information would assist in 
developing an initial declaration, as well as provide the 
Libyans with a general overview of the CWC declaration 
process.  Bolton added that Libya does not really have a good 
idea what the OPCW will require and expect, and will require 
a fair amount of guidance. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Reeps said it was important for Libya not to be 
surprised by the TS, or to surprise the TS team, and Bolton 
commented that the TS team should be in-country sooner rather 
than later.  Finally, Deputy DG Hawtin said that the public 
affairs line should emphasize that there is close 
coordination between the OPCW, U.S., U.K. and Libya.  Bolton 
concurred, noting that Tripoli should recognize the benefits 
of having press reports highlighting the role of the OPCW, 
U.S., U.K. and Libyan cooperation. 
 
¶7.  (U)  U/S Bolton has cleared this message. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Javits sends. 
SOBEL