This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ACCRA 000017 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/DMALAC, AND OES/HLEE 
USDA FOR FAS/OA/BSIMMONS AND APHIS/BRS-JTURNER 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR JLEWIS 
STATE PASS TO FDA FOR RLAKE 
EPA FOR JANDERSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID ECON ETRD GH SENV TBIO TSPL BIOTECHNOLOGY
SUBJECT: GHANA: STATUS OF BIOTECHNOLOGY REGULATIONS 
 
REF: 2003 STATE 263456 
 
¶1.  Per reftel request, Post provides the following 
information on the legal and regulatory environment covering 
agricultural biotechnology in Ghana.  The Government of Ghana 
is still developing its biotech policies, so Post will 
provide regular updates, as appropriate. 
 
¶2.  Ghana currently has no national laws regulating the 
approval, production, importation, and labeling of products 
that may contain the products of agricultural biotechnology. 
However, since the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety became 
legally binding on Ghana, Ghana has drafted a Biosafety 
Guideline and will likely complete a National Biosafety 
Framework by mid 2004. 
 
¶3.  Under the draft Biosafety Guideline, all GMOs entering 
Ghana will require a permit. The Guideline will govern only 
contained work on biotech products, according to Mr. Alex 
Owusu-Biney, the Project Coordinator of the National 
Biosafety Committee (NBC), which was established to develop 
the National Biosafety Framework. The Guideline has not been 
applied to consumer ready foods.  For biotech feed and seeds, 
either imported or produced in Ghana, permits will be 
required from the Ministry of Environment and Science.  Under 
existing import laws, the Plant Protection and Regulatory 
Services Department (PPRSD) issues phytosanitary permits for 
seeds including grains such as rice and wheat.  The Animal 
Production Department (ARD) issues permits for feed imported 
into Ghana.  Under existing procedures, these two 
institutions refer any feed or seed products thought to 
contain agricultural biotechnology to the Biotechnology and 
Nuclear Agricultural Institute (BNARI) through the NBC for 
risk assessment.  The Guideline does not apply to consumer 
ready foods.  The Food and Drugs Board (FDB), which registers 
all food products imported into Ghana, expects to enforce 
labeling requirements on biotech foods when a law is passed 
governing agricultural biotechnology. 
 
¶4.  A permit on biotechnology products can also be obtained 
directly through: 
 
The Minister 
Ministry of Environment and Science 
P.O. Box 232 
Accra, Ghana 
Tel:  (233) (21) 666049 
Fax:  (233) (21) 666828 
 
The application should include a signed letter and an 
accompanying dossier on the product.  The dossier should 
contain contact information of the requester and technical 
information describing the GMO, the type of application, type 
of receiving environment, data on environmental impacts, food 
safety and health impacts on receiving environment. The 
information should be sufficient to begin risk assessment. 
 
¶5.  Ghana,s proposed National Biosafety Framework, which is 
being funded by UNEP/GEF and will be implemented by the 
National Biosafety Committee, has four main components: a 
legislative system or a National Biosafety Law providing 
guidelines and regulations; an administrative system to 
handle permits; a decision making system including risk 
assessment and risk management procedures; and a system for 
information sharing and public participation.  Issues such as 
the use of labels on biotech products, testing of shipped 
products, penalties, and traceability systems are still under 
discussion.  It is likely that labels and special 
documentation will be required for all biotech products. 
 
Yates