This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  CARACAS 000176 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
USCINCSO ALSO FOR POLAD 
STATE PASS USAID FOR DCHA/OTI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/15/2014 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM VE
SUBJECT: CHAVEZ HURLS INSULTS AND REACTS TO USG STATEMENTS 
 
 
Classified By: Abelardo A. Arias, Political Counselor, 
 for Reasons 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Seeking to shift attention from the CNE and the recall 
referendum processes, President Hugo Chavez reacted to recent 
comments on Venezuela by USG officials, repeatedly calling 
National Security Advisor Rice "an illiterate." Chavez 
believes that the USG is meddling in Venezuelan internal 
affairs and conspiring with the opposition.  In a 
nationally-broadcast show on January 10, Chavez said he 
considered the comments by USG officials, particularly 
comments by Rice, to be violation of Venezuelan sovereignty. 
The Vice President, National Assembly, Attorney General, and 
Foreign Minister also made comments insisting that USG not 
become involved in Venezuelan internal affairs.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
USG Comments on Referendum and Democracy in Venezuela 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. (U) Recent public comments by USG officials reiterating 
our policy on Venezuela have drawn substantial attention.  On 
January 5 and again on January 12, the Department's Deputy 
Spokesman said, "We (USG) remain committed to working with 
the OAS to support the Venezuelan Government and opposition 
achieve a constitutional, democratic, peaceful, and electoral 
solution to the current political impasse there."  Speaking 
at the Council of the Americas on January 6, WHA A/S Roger 
Noreiga did not mention Venezuela in his speech, but 
responding to reporters, he stated that he understood that 
Chavez was not a close friend of the U.S.  The Secretary also 
acknowledged the strained relationship with Venezuela and 
commented on the referendum, emphasizing US support for 
resolving Venezuela's political situation in a constitutional 
manner. 
 
¶3. (U) Responding to questions on the Venezuelan referendum, 
National Security Advisor Rice said, "President Chavez has an 
opportunity to demonstrate that he believes in democratic 
processes by allowing this recall to go through unhindered, 
unfettered, and then living up to the terms of it."  She also 
noted that Venezuela is going through a difficult time in its 
democratic development.  Citing the USG,s support of the OAS 
and NGOs, particularly the Carter Center, to ensure that the 
referendum process is held without interference, she said 
that she hoped that Chavez would "demonstrate that he 
believes in a democratic future for Venezuela by carrying out 
the wishes of his people."  Later at the Monterrey Summit, 
President Bush repeated the USG position, saying, "We will 
work with the Organization of American States to ensure the 
integrity of the presidential recall and referendum process 
underway in Venezuela." 
 
------------ 
GOV comments 
------------ 
 
¶4. (U) S(j}) to Rice, referring to her 
again as "a true illiterate."  He quickly explained to the 
audience that while she can read, she cannot read the truth. 
In response, he offered to send books to her from the Cuban 
 
literacy program.  Chavez read a transcript of Rice's 
comments and wryly asked, "I don't have a reason to call her 
an illiterate?"  After denouncing Rice's response to the 
April 2002 coup, Chavez likened Rice's comments to those of 
"hypocritical Pharisees."  Chavez then claimed to have 
"figured out" that the flurry of USG comments were part of a 
plot with the opposition to overthrow him.  He said that if 
the CNE finds the referendum to be invalid, Washington and 
Rice will say that Chavez is not supporting democracy.  At 
the Monterrey Summit, Chavez stated that comments by 
President Bush on Venezuela "were more intelligent" than 
those of his national security advisor. 
 
¶6. (U) On January 6, Vice President Jose Vicente Rangel said 
Ereli's comments were a "broken record" and questioned why 
the U.S. was giving such treatment to a country of such 
importance.  Rangel called the Secretary's comments 
"impertinent," adding that "it is not up to Mr. Powell, the 
US State Department or the United States, but (to) the 
National Electoral Council of Venezuela to decide." On 
January 9, Rangel acknowledged political differences, but 
said that he hoped to have a normal relationship with the U.S. 
 
-------------------------- 
Other GOV Branches Respond 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) On January 13, the National Assembly approved a 
statement introduced by Fifth Republic Movement (MVR) deputy 
Tarek William Saab.  The statement rejects "repeated 
interventions and interference of the U.S." in Venezuelan 
internal affairs.  The document, which specifically 
references Powell and Rice,s comments, calls on the U.S. to 
respect the principles of non-intervention and 
self-determination.  In a similar fashion, Attorney General 
Isaias Rodriguez also issued a statement, insisting that 
countries in the region do not get involved in Venezuelan 
internal affairs, directly referring to Rice's comments.  He 
"urged countries to avoid comments" because they could 
"complicate the situation and increase tensions."  Venezuelan 
Foreign Minister Roy Chaderton also rebuked Rice and the U.S. 
 He said that the referendum was an internal matter and that 
the USG should not start a fight with Venezuela. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Three factors explain the loud and disproportionate 
response to the statements by senior U.S. officials: 
 
-- the GOV wants to shift public focus from the CNE and the 
referendum to U.S.-Venezuelan relations; 
 
-- the GOV seeks to maintain pressure on the CNE; and 
 
-- Chavez wanted to burnish his nationalist credentials on 
the eve of the Monterrey Summit. 
 
¶9. (C) The impending visit of former President Carter (Jan. 
25-27) will of course underscore the valid role of foreign 
groups (OAS and Carter Center) in monitoring the CNE 
signature count process, and more generally the referendum 
process.  Our public statements should continue to stress our 
support for the referendum process and the implementation of 
OAS resolution 833. 
 
SHAPIRO 
 
 
NNNN