This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

080903Z Jan 04UNCLAS KATHMANDU 000064 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: STUDENTS CONTINUE PROTESTS AGAINST THE KING 
 
REF: A. 03 KATHMANDU 2507 
 
     ¶B. 03 KATHMANDU 2480 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  Student demonstrations persisted for the 
23rd day in Kathmandu, in certain instances turning violent. 
On January 7, police and students clashed in several 
locations, resulting in the injury of 8 students and 3 
journalists.  One student leader indicated that the protests 
would last until the government issues an apology for the 
December arrest of three student leaders for sedition, 
although those students were released on December 23.  The 
political parties are certainly encouraging, and may perhaps 
be funding, the student demonstrations, which are expected to 
continue for the indefinite future.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Student demonstrations have occurred almost daily 
in Kathmandu since December 16, Black Flag Day, when three 
student leaders were arrested on sedition charges (Ref B). 
Although the student leaders were released on December 23 
(Ref A), student unions continue to use the initial momentum 
to conduct public protests against "regression."  (Note. 
Because Nepali law prohibits anyone from "causing hatred, 
malice or disrespect" against the King, the movement against 
"regression" focuses on the King's actions rather than the 
King himself.  End Note.)  According to police sources, the 
past 23 days of agitation have led to damage to property 
worth NRs 35 million (nearly USD 500,000) and the injury of 
24 police personnel, 71 students, as well as 7 journalists. 
Press reports indicate that by-standers also have been 
injured by police.  The demonstrations have caused daily 
traffic disturbances in central Kathmandu. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On January 7, the Seven Students Union (the umbrella 
group for the student unions affiliated with the seven major 
political parties) decided to burn an "effigy of regression" 
in a mock funeral ceremony at a large public park in central 
Kathmandu.  According to a central committee member of the 
CPN-UML student wing, the students attempted to prevent fire 
fighters from reaching the burning effigy, leading the police 
to use batons against the students.  Police sources claim 
that the police only charged the students with batons after 
they began chanting slogans in favor of a republican state. 
At least 11 demonstrators (8 students and 3 journalists) were 
injured in the clash with three in critical condition.  That 
same day, students also sought to march on the Royal Palace, 
provoking the police to fire three canisters of tear gas in 
an attempt to disperse the crowd.  (Note.  A standing 
directive by Kathmandu Municipality prohibits anyone from 
demonstrating near certain locations, such as the Palace and 
the Prime Minister's office.  End Note.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) Various human rights organizations, such as the 
Center for Human Rights and Democratic Studies, as well as 
the political parties have criticized the police for 
mishandling the demonstrations.  Student union 
representatives have indicated that the protests will 
continue until the government apologizes for the December 
arrest of the three student leaders. On January 8 as of 1630 
hours, between 700-800 students were demonstrating at various 
points throughout Kathmandu. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment.  The political parties are most certainly 
encouraging -- if not subsidizing -- the student union 
protests, which will likely continue until the political 
parties' coffers are emptied.  Unfortunately, lack of proper 
civil disorder management equipment and training for the 
police exacerbates an already sensitive matter.  The injury 
of innocent by-standers, journalists and protesters will only 
fan the flames of public discontent.  End Comment. 
MALINOWSKI