This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LILONGWE 000141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR RM DAS SID KAPLAN AND AF/S 
USAID FOR AFR/AA (T.WOODS) AND AFR/SA (P.FLEURET AND 
S.COOKE) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT EAID MI
SUBJECT: STATE/AID JOINT STRATEGIC PLAN: AMBASSADOR'S 
ALL-STAFF REVIEW 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY. On February 12, Ambassador Browning conducted a 
meeting to introduce and review the new State/AID Joint 
Strategic Plan.  The concept behind this plan, how it will be 
implemented, and what the expected results will be were 
presented to American and locally engaged staff of both 
agencies.  The Ambassador and the USAID Mission Director 
highlighted the already strong cooperation between USAID and 
State in Malawi, and expressed their expectation that the 
formal alignment of foreign policy goals will benefit all 
involved. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  In his opening remarks, the Ambassador described the 
initiative as an opportunity to better define the U.S. 
foreign policy mission, help to set priorities, and clarify 
common goals.  He suggested that significant administrative 
and management changes will be the aspect of this initiative 
first noticed at overseas posts. He emphasized joint 
State/USAID training and employee exchanges, a unified 
communications and messaging system, and joint management of 
planning and resources as resulting improvements. The DCM 
added that vis-a-vis the Mission's key MPP program goals of 
strengthening democracy, economic development, and an 
improved health situation, the joint strategic plan increases 
the Mission's ability to accomplish objectives. 
 
¶3.  The USAID director noted that the new joint strategy 
reflects the role of USAID as a foreign policy agency. 
Because a strong relationship already exists in Malawi, the 
USAID director commented that the joint strategy puts the 
development goals of the USG in greater relief but will not 
significantly affect program activity in the country. 
USAID's deputy director added that the collaboration with the 
embassy and the support of the Ambassador in USAID's 
Triennial Review was noted in USAID/Washington as an example 
of how the common goals are meant to be operationalized. In 
the same fashion, USAID participated closely with the embassy 
in preparing the MPP. To illustrate the strong USAID 
endorsement of the Joint Strategic Plan and to address some 
questions raised by USAID staff, the concluding ten minutes 
of the recent USAID "all hands meeting" with Administrator 
Natsios was shown. 
 
¶4.  Staff were given the opportunity to ask questions about 
the plan, its implementation, and effects. Concerns regarding 
wholesale merging of the two agencies were raised, as were 
concerns about the impact on staffing levels in certain 
fields. The Ambassador stated that although he was confident 
a complete merger unlikely and unnecessary, there may be some 
staffing ramifications as management efficiencies are 
identified. If we can successfully accomplish the same goals 
as two agencies, he observed, the appearance of a need for a 
combined agency will be diminished. He added that an 
important objective of any government agency is responding to 
the needs of taxpayers; streamlining and right-sizing make it 
easier to determine accomplishments. 
 
¶5.  We understand that the Joint Management Council has 
established functional working groups to prepare 
implementation plans, and we look forward to learning about 
them and implementing their recommendations on the post 
level. We believe that the Strategic Plan will benefit the 
work both of State and of USAID in the field. 
 
 
BROWNING