This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2014 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU
SUBJECT: PRODI PRAISES GOT REFORMS IN HISTORIC VISIT 
 
 
Classified by Deputy Polcouns Charles O. Blaha; reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: During a January 15-16 visit to Turkey, 
European Commission President Prodi praised GOT leaders for 
adopting extensive EU-related legislative reforms.  He called 
for greater implementation of the reforms, and urged progress 
on a Cyprus solution by May.  He also said the EU and GOT 
need to build greater public support in Europe for Turkey's 
EU membership.  He did not indicate whether the Commission 
will recommend that the EU at its December Summit set a date 
to begin accession talks with Turkey.  PM Erdogan and FM Gul 
accepted Prodi's views, while calling for more EU pressure on 
the Greek side of the Cyprus issue.  They also warned Prodi 
that it will be difficult for the GOT to continue the reform 
process if the EU does not set a date for accession talks. 
This was the first visit to Turkey by a Commission President 
in 40 years.  End Summary. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Prodi Meets Top GOT Leaders, Delivers Speeches 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
¶2. (U) During his visit to Ankara and Istanbul Prodi met with 
PM Erdogan, FM Gul, President Sezer, Speaker of Parliament 
Arinc, and opposition Republican Peoples' Party (CHP) 
President Baykal.  He also addressed the full Parliament and 
gave a speech at Bosphorus University.  In his speeches, 
Prodi praised Turkey for adopting "far-reaching political 
reforms" in pursuit of EU membership.  However, he also said 
the GOT needs to implement recent reform legislation, and 
called for further improvements in judicial independence and 
efficiency, cultural rights, anti-torture efforts, and 
religious freedom.  In addition, he said the role of the 
military in politics should be further reduced, in line with 
EU norms.  Prodi acknowledged European anxieties about 
Turkey's size, and urged greater efforts in EU states and 
Turkey to enhance mutual understanding and increase public 
support in Europe for Turkey's EU candidacy.  To that end, he 
inaugurated a new EU information center in Istanbul.  Prodi 
averred that Turkey's young, dynamic population would be an 
economic boon for the EU, and that Turkey's membership would 
promote better relations between the West and the Muslim 
world.  He said a Cyprus settlement "would greatly 
facilitate" Turkey's EU aspirations.  "Let me be clear," he 
said.  "This is not a formal condition, but a political 
reality." 
 
 
---------------------------- 
Prodi Promises "Fair" Report 
---------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (U) Ayse Sezgin, head of the MFA Deputy Directorate 
General for EU Affairs, told us Prodi did not go beyond his 
public comments in his private meetings.  Prodi told GOT 
leaders the European Commission recognizes the impressive 
progress Turkey has made toward meeting EU accession 
criteria.  But he did not indicate whether the Commission is 
likely to recommend in its October progress report that the 
EU at the December Summit set a date to begin accession talks 
with Turkey. He promised that the report will be fair and 
objective -- an "X-ray" of the situation in Turkey.  He also 
said the EU will not introduce new conditions or hold Turkey 
to a higher standard than other candidate countries.  In 
Istanbul, a reporter tried to pin down Prodi's view of 
Turkey's candidacy; Prodi said he supported Turkey in the 
past as Italian PM, but his current role as Commission 
president precludes him from taking a public position. 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
GOT: Date Needed to Continue Reforms 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
¶4. (C) Martin Dawson, head of the Political Section of the 
European Commission Representation to Turkey, said Prodi went 
out of his way to congratulate Erdogan and Gul on the 
"impressive, surprising" human rights-related legislative 
reforms the GOT has passed in its pursuit of EU membership. 
Both the PM and FM appeared to understand Prodi's call for 
greater implementation of the reforms.  They also "talked the 
talk" on Cyprus, telling Prodi they were committed to seeking 
a solution by May, while insisting that the EU put more 
pressure on the Greek side.  Baykal, however, was defensive 
on Cyprus, resorting to the "same old rhetoric" about how the 
status quo is the best solution, causing Verheugen to roll 
his eyes and to remark later to Prodi that Baykal's position 
amounted to "stonewalling."  Sema Kilicer, political officer 
at the European Commission Representation to Turkey, told us 
Erdogan and Gul warned Prodi that if the EU in December does 
not offer Turkey a date to begin accession negotiations, it 
will become politically very difficult for the GOT to 
continue the reform process. 
 
 
------------------------------ 
Parliament's Response Lukewarm 
------------------------------ 
 
 
¶5. (C) Dawson said EU officials were surprised by the 
lukewarm applause Prodi receive in Parliament.  One Cabinet 
member later told them he believed legislators were put off 
by Prodi's emphasis on the lack of strong public support in 
EU states for Turkey's membership.  Kilicer, however, said 
some GOT officials seemed to appreciate Prodi's call for 
building public support in Europe, even if they are unsure of 
how to follow up on it.  A number of MFA diplomats have 
raised the subject with her since the visit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEUTSCH