This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L DJIBOUTI 000089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/IP, DS/IP/AF, DS/IP/ITA, DS/DSS/ATA, 
DS/ATA/TR, AF/E, AF/EX 
ADDIS ABABA FOR RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/20/2014 
TAGS: PTER ASEC DJ
SUBJECT: TRAIN EXPLOSION IN DJIBOUTI 
 
REF: 03 DJIBOUTI 2241 
 
Classified By: RSO MARC RAMOS FOR REASON 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (SBU) On the morning of January 18, 2004 an explosive 
device detonated aboard a car of the Ethiopian/Djibouti 
Railway.  Current reports reveal that several people 
experienced moderate injuries and one female experienced 
serious injuries that would possibly result in the amputation 
of one of her legs. The severity of her injuries was due to 
proximity to the device.  Djiboutian authorities responded to 
the scene in a timely fashion and immediately began an 
investigation.  Several persons have been detained by the 
Djiboutian authorities for questioning.  At the time of this 
cable, there is insufficient information to comment on the 
details of the incident to include identification of 
suspects, motivation, damage account, evidence, identity of 
the injured or terrorist ties.  There were no Americans or 
expatriates injured as a result of the explosion nor is there 
any impact on American or Western interests within the region. 
 
¶2. (C) Post comments:  This is one of several incidents that 
have occurred in the past year that have targeted the 
Ethiopian/Djibouti railway.  Although first glimpse would 
indicate that this is a terrorist motivated incident, Post 
believes that the underlying cause for these incidents is 
financially and politically motivated.  Information revealed 
in discussions between key officers at Post and their 
Djiboutian counterparts has indicated that persons who have 
controlling interests in the railway or trucking industry are 
at odds and are taking steps to bolster their financial foot 
hold over their respective businesses.  Post management has 
been asked to provide assistance in renovating and securing 
the railway by members of the Djiboutian government in the 
spirit of fighting the war on terrorism.  Post has informally 
declined such requests and maintains that such efforts to 
prevent or counter terrorism will be done in diplomatic 
coordination with the Host Nation. 
 
¶3. (C)  Post will continue to work with Host Nation 
counterparts to enhance its counter terrorism capability, but 
does not believe that it is necessary to focus a great amount 
of resources on these incidents other than monitoring and the 
collection of information.  However tragic they may be, Post 
does not believe that these incidents are terrorist in 
nature, but more so criminal acts aimed at eliminating the 
railway.  Furthermore, due to the distance of the railway 
from US facilities, the lack of American or Western interest 
involved and the fact that virtually no Americans or 
Westerners ever board the train, Post believes that these 
incidents only pose a collateral risk to personnel and are of 
no greater threat than being in the wrong place at the wrong 
time. 
 
¶4. (U) RSO Comments:  It is worth noting that 
counter-terrorism initiatives such as the Diplomatic 
Security's Anti Terrorism Assistance Program (DS/ATA) 
continues to benefit the Host Nation as well as the US 
Mission to Djibouti.  In discussions with Host Nation Police, 
the RSO received excellent input from the chief investigator 
on the case, who just happened to be a graduate of the DS/ATA 
Post Blast Investigation course.  The chief investigator 
provided the RSO with detailed accounts of how the 
investigative team utilized the skills and resources provided 
by DS/ATA to conduct an appropriate investigation of the 
crime scene.  The chief investigator expressed sincere 
gratitude for this enhanced capability and  requested that 
DS/ATA training continue as much as possible.  The Djiboutian 
police forces have already incorporated several techniques 
and tactics into their daily operations with positive results 
for Americans and Djiboutians alike. 
 
¶5. (U) POC is RSO Marc Ramos at 253-35-39-95 or 
RamosMA@State.GOV 
SMITH