This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 000243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/BCLTV; CINPAC FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/23/2014 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV BM
SUBJECT: REGIME HAMMERS ACTIVISTS WITH LENGTHY PRISON TERMS 
 
REF: 03 RANGOON 1314 
 
Classified By: DCM Ron McMullen for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  The SPDC has handed down prison sentences 
ranging from 7 to 17 years to six university activists who 
distributed a handful of leaflets criticizing the regime's 
"road map for democracy."  This harsh treatment is business 
as usual for a regime that tolerates no dissent.  Meanwhile, 
Burma's neighbors continue to send special envoys and VIPs to 
Rangoon, but few are willing to address human rights issues. 
End summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Burmese regime, at a secret trial inside Rangoon's 
infamous Insein prison, handed down on February 20 sentences 
ranging from 7 to 17 years to a group of six young political 
activists detained since September 2003 for distributing 
leaflets that criticized the SPDC's "road map for democracy." 
 
 
¶3. (C) The six convicted activists were part of a larger 
group of university students originally detained o/a 
September 26 (reftel).  In addition to the students, 
authorities had also detained and later released U Win Naing, 
a former U.S. Embassy FSN and veteran political activist. 
Neither U Win Naing nor any of the sentenced activists are 
members of the National League for Democracy (NLD) or 
affiliated with registered political parties.  However, they 
are strong supporters of the pro-democracy movement and are 
frequently referred to as Burma's "Third Force" or "Third 
Way" of independent activists who join the NLD and the 
pro-democracy ethnic groups in opposition to the regime. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The students allegedly distributed a handful of 
leaflets in Rangoon Division last September, in which they 
called on the SPDC to honor the 1990 elections (that the NLD 
won decisively) and urged Burmese citizens not to support the 
regime's seven-point road map. 
 
¶5. (C) According to Embassy sources, all six of the student 
activists were convicted of undertaking prohibited political 
activities.  In addition, two students, Nandar Sit Aung and 
Kyaw Soe Moe, were convicted of "illegal assembly" for 
organizing the group.  Nandar Sit Aung, who received the 
longest sentence (17 years), was also convicted under 
immigration provisions of the law for having contact with 
Thailand-based exile groups. 
 
¶6. (C) Embassy sources identify the following student 
activists sentenced at Insein Prison on February 20: 
 
Nandar Sit Aung: Sentenced to 17 years. 
 
Zaw Lin Tun: Sentenced to 12 years. 
 
Kyaw Soe Moe: Sentenced to 12 years. 
 
Han Win Aung: Sentenced to 7 years. 
 
Lwin Ko Lat (aka Win Ko): Sentenced to 7 years. 
 
Kyaw Kyaw: Sentenced to 7 years. 
 
 
¶7. (C) Comment:  These harsh sentences are business as usual 
for a regime that tolerates no dissent.  Regretfully, among a 
long parade of regional leaders calling on the generals since 
the unveiling of the road map last August (the latest 
including the new Malaysian Prime Minister and the new 
Filipino Foreign Secretary; see forthcoming septel), scant 
few are willing to raise concerns over human rights abuses. 
End summary. 
 
Martinez