This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 YEREVAN 000314 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR CACEN (SIDEREAS), G/TIP (LERNER) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KCRM ELAB KWMN SMIG PGOV PREL UZ AM
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH ARMENIAN DEPUTY FONMIN ON TIP 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT 
ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY.  DCM met with Deputy Foreign 
Minister Tatoul Margarian, who oversees the GOAM 
Interagency Commission to Address Issues Related to 
Human Trafficking (TIP Commission), to discuss concerns 
that the GOAM has been slow to take visible, concrete 
steps to combat trafficking in persons in recent 
months.  DCM made it clear that in determining tier 
placement this year, G/TIP would be looking closely 
both at follow-up on previously reported trafficking 
arrests and investigations and GOAM initiatives to 
combat, prevent and prosecute trafficking in persons. 
Margarian was displeased with the possibility that 
Armenia might slip back to Tier 3, but receptive to our 
recommendations and the need to work closely with the 
Embassy to ensure that we have complete information on 
GOAM actions in this important area.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) DCM expressed concern that following the 
promotion of the head of the TIP Commission to another 
agency, the Commission's activities decreased 
considerably and that slow deliberation over the GOAM's 
ratification of the National Plan of Action (NPA) 
impeded implementation of key goals.  Margarian 
admitted that progress on TIP might have been slow, but 
emphasized that there have been positive developments. 
He noted that the issue of trafficking in persons is a 
sensitive one, crossing many sectors, and has no 
unequivocal solutions.  However, he agreed that now 
that the NPA has been ratified, the GOAM must put 
greater emphasis on implementation. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Margarian was presented with the Department's 
country strategy, brief project descriptions of USG- 
funded counter-trafficking initiatives, and questions 
provided as guidance in preparation of the annual TIP 
report.  He immediately called one of his staff in our 
presence to discuss our request for information in 
preparation of this year's TIP report and confirmed 
that we could expect answers to our inquiries by 10 
February.  This will allow us to work with the TIP 
Commission to identify gaps in key areas that might be 
addressed in the near term. (NOTE.  The TIP Commission 
met later that day.  An informal readout of that 
meeting by one of the members indicates that Embassy's 
concerns were discussed at length.  The Procurator 
General's Office made an appeal to the Commission 
members to provide complete and honest information on 
the work that has been done, especially in the area of 
law enforcement efforts.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The recent case involving Uzbek women 
trafficked to Armenia for sexual exploitation, which 
Margarian was unaware of, was discussed at length. 
Although indications that Armenia may be a destination 
country for trafficking victims is a concern, we are 
very encouraged by law enforcement's proactive role in 
arresting alleged traffickers and opening a criminal 
investigation.  Moreover, we are very pleased that law 
enforcement swiftly identified the trafficking victims 
among the arrested and referred them to a local NGO 
providing trafficking victim assistance under the 
auspices of an USG-funded program.  (NOTE: The case 
comes on the heels of OSCE-IOM-U.S. Embassy co- 
sponsored training on victim identification and NGO 
referral mechanisms.  END NOTE) 
 
¶5.  (SBU) DCM took the opportunity to bring up concerns 
about police handling of some aspects of the case and 
emphasized the need to ensure victims' anonymity and 
engage them with respect and compassion.  Margarian 
agreed that there is room for improvement in law 
enforcement's interaction with trafficking victims, but 
attributed any shortcomings primarily to over 
zealousness.  (COMMENT: Embassy has had discussions 
with various interlocutors on the specifics of this 
case, all of which indicate that over zealousness is 
likely the root cause behind shortcomings in the 
treatment of victims.  Most interlocutors agree that 
given the positive steps forward by law enforcement on 
this issue, international organizations and local NGOs 
should continue to engage law enforcement in a 
proactive way, rather than alienating them with harsh 
criticism.  END COMMENT.) 
 
¶6.  (U) Lastly, DCM raised the issue of bilateral law 
enforcement cooperation with key origin, destination 
and transit countries, especially the U.A.E. and 
Uzbekistan.  Margarian indicated that there are no 
current bilateral agreements with Uzbekistan, although 
law enforcement reports that a letter of request has 
been sent to their counterparts in Uzbekistan on the 
current trafficking investigation.  A bilateral treaty 
is in place between Armenia and the U.A.E.; however, 
there are no specific provisions regarding trafficking 
in persons.  This is an issue that the Embassy will 
continue to follow closely in Armenia. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) COMMENT: Perhaps the single most important 
point emphasized during the meeting with Deputy Foreign 
Minister Margarian is the need for the GOAM to "take 
ownership" of efforts to combat and prevent trafficking 
in persons in Armenia.  Despite the GOAM's willingness 
to participate in various events developed by local 
NGOs and international organizations, the perception 
both in Armenia and abroad is that the GOAM is not 
taking its own initiatives.  This is an important 
nuance that has been lost on many key GOAM officials to 
date.  Overall, the Embassy believes the meeting was 
well received and has helped to reinvigorate GOAM's 
attention to this critical issue.  END COMMENT. 
 
ORDWAY