This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS YEREVAN 000507 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CACEN; DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL OEXC AM
SUBJECT:  GOVERNMENT WITHDRAWS CONTROVERSIAL LAW; 
STUDENTS PROCEED WITH VICTORY RALLY 
 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Prime Minister Andranik Margarian announced 
February 26 that the government would formally withdraw 
from parliament the controversial "Law on Military 
Service."  Margarian blamed other ministers for failing 
to explain the benefits of the law clearly, thereby 
allowing the growing student protests to gain momentum. 
Students turned an already scheduled demonstration into 
a victory rally February 27, pledging to remain united 
and vigilant against any government attempts to re- 
introduce the law.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
PRIME MINISTER WITHDRAWS LAW 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Prime Minister Andranik Margarian withdrew the 
"Law on Military Service" from the National Assembly on 
February 26.  The announcement came a day after the 
student group "For the Progress of Science" pledged 
large demonstrations in the coming days to protest the 
law, which would remove draft deferments for graduate 
study.  Margarian faulted government ministers, in 
particular Education Minister Sergo Yeritsian, for 
failing to adequately explain the law "in a timely or 
appropriate manner", and build public support for its 
passage. 
 
------------------------ 
VICTORY RALLY DRAWS 2000 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) The student group "For the Development of 
Science" turned an already-scheduled demonstration 
against the bill into a victory rally in downtown 
Yerevan February 27.  Approximately 2000 students heard 
group organizers praise their discipline and unity 
throughout the campaign, and issue calls for vigilance 
in case the government were to re-introduce the law. 
In an address to the crowd, one student praised his 
peer's "complete unity, which led to our ultimate 
victory." 
 
¶5. (SBU) Several leaders of "For the Development of 
Science" told us at the rally that they were "shocked" 
the government had backed down so quickly (analysis of 
the campaign will be provided septel).  One student 
said that they had not yet delivered the thousands of 
signed form letters to parliamentarians.  The students 
were wary of the government's maneuvers, stating that 
perhaps the government would re-introduce the bill in 
the summer when students were on break.  They pledged 
to maintain their movement to monitor any developments. 
 
ORDWAY