This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000921 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2014 
TAGS: EG IZ PREL TU
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT MUBARAK VISITS TURKEY 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 226 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, E.O. 12958, reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  During an February 11-12 visit to Ankara, 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak listened to Turkish views on 
Iraq, while the Turks did most of the listening on the 
subject of Israel/Palestine.  Mubarak agreed with Turks' 
concerns about Iraq's territorial integrity and unity.  He 
briefed his GOT interlocutors on his efforts to broker talks 
between Sharon and Abu Ala'a, and to dissuade Palestinian 
groups from using terror tactics.  Mubarak also exchanged 
views on the Greater Middle East Initiative, stressing that 
change should not be imposed from outside and should account 
for the characteristics of each country.  End Summary. 
 
 
Suddenly, Mubarak's First Visit Since 1998 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Both MFA Middle East Department Head Kemal Tuzun and 
Egyptian Embassy Counselor Ayman Moucharafa said they found 
out about Mubarak's visit, his first since 1998, on February 
7, four days before Mubarak's arrival.  Moucharafa attributed 
the short notice to Egyptian security concerns in light of 
the November bombings in Istanbul.  Moucharafa said that 
Mubarak had waited to size up Erdogan after the elections. 
Mubarak had received former PM Erbakan, been put off by 
Erbakan's Islamist bent, and wanted to make sure Erdogan was 
not cut from the same cloth.  Moucharafa added that Mubarak 
further delayed the visit out of displeasure at Turkey's 
decision to send troops to Iraq. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) During his 24-hour visit, Mubarak accompanied by FM 
Maher, met with President Sezer, PM Erdogan, FM Gul and TGS 
chief Ozkok. 
 
 
Iraq 
 
 
¶4.  (C) According to Tuzun, Iraq was a main topic of 
discussion in all Mubarak's meetings.  Tuzun said Mubarak 
mostly listened to and agreed with Turkish views about the 
importance of Iraq's territorial integrity and unity, 
equitable use of Iraq's natural resources, and opposition to 
privileged status for any ethnic group.  Both sides agreed to 
regularly consult by phone and in person on Iraq. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) In a separate meeting with Turkish FM Gul, Egyptian 
FM Maher emphasized the importance of elections, adding that 
the Iraqi people should "be consulted more" about future 
elections. 
 
 
Israel/Palestine 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Israel/Palestine was the other main topic.  Tuzun 
said discussion on this topic mostly took the form of GOT 
interlocutors soliciting Mubarak's views.  Egyptian Counselor 
explained that the GOT did not have as good contacts in the 
region as the GOE, Turkey could not play as large a role in 
the conflict as Egypt.  Mubarak briefed the GOT on his recent 
phone calls to Sharon, Abu Ala'a, and Arafat.  Mubarak said 
he was trying to arrange a meeting between Sharon and Abu 
Ala'a, and had proposed that their chiefs of staff meet to 
iron out "technical points" in preparation for an eventual 
meeting.  Mubarak favors the meetings being "without 
preconditions." 
 
 
¶7.  (C) Mubarak also told the GOT he will continue pressing 
Palestinian militants, including HAMAS and Palestinian 
Islamic Jihad, to cease terror attacks.  Tuzun claimed both 
the GOT was impressed with Mubarak's and FM Maher's 
demonstration of "clear political will" on this point. 
 
 
Turkey, Egypt, and the Greater Middle East 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Tuzun characterized Mubarak's visit as a 
demonstration of the "increasing role" Turkey sees itself 
playing in the Middle East.  Moucharafa said the GOE welcomed 
increased GOT diplomacy with Arab countries including, for 
example, what he characterized as improved Turkish-Syrian 
relations in light of President Assad's recent visit 
(reftel).  Both Tuzun and Moucharafa said Mubarak and his GOT 
interlocutors exchanged views about the Greater Middle East 
Initiative.  Mubarak stressed the importance of input from 
the regional countries themselves, instead of changes  being 
imposed from outside.  Mubarak also stressed the need to gear 
the initiative to the individual "characteristics" of each 
country.  For example, Mubarak said, womens' rights were at 
very different levels in Egypt as compared to the Gulf 
States.  FM Gul emphasized the need for countries in the 
region to become more transparent, democratic and modern. 
EDELMAN