This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 000483 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA 
STATE FOR IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/BWHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION FEB 10-11: Iraq, Halliburton, 
Educational Reform, US Influence 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Press reports that in response to pervasive 
rumors of malfeasance on the part of a Kuwaiti firm hired by 
US company Halliburton to supply fuel to Iraq, Kuwait's 
Minister of Energy has asked the public prosecutor to 
investigate whether local company "Al Tanmiya" and others in 
Kuwait improperly benefited from their contract with the US 
Army. 
 
On the op/ed pages, liberal and conservative commentators 
address the issue of educational reform, democratization and 
US influence on Kuwaiti society from profoundly antithetical 
perspectives.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  "Farewell Halliburton " 
Conservative Islamist, Dr. Wael Al-Hassawi, wrote in 
independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (2/10):  "A lot has been said 
about the Halliburton contract and the ensuing corruption. 
Therefore, transparency and the government's position are 
essential.  I was pleased to read about the Minister of 
Energy's announcement that he referred the Kuwait Petroleum 
Corporation contract with the American contractor . to the 
public prosecutor for investigation.  I was also pleased to 
read that Halliburton is considering leaving Kuwait and 
operating elsewhere, especially after this scandal was 
exposed in the United States." 
 
¶3.  "The Root of the Problem" 
Former Minister and MP, Ali Ahmad Al-Baghli, wrote in 
independent Al-Qabas (2/10):  "The World was turned upside 
down because of Halliburton's contract through Kellogg Brown 
and Root to purchase oil by-products from Kuwait Petroleum 
Company's subcontractor Al-Tanmiya.  The escalation of this 
issue prompted the Minister of Energy to refer the case to 
the public prosecutor for investigation. I believe that this 
will not reveal any transgressions.  The Public Prosecutor's 
task is to investigate facts that constitute criminal acts, 
not to expose administrative wrongdoings.  The root of the 
problem lies with Kuwait Petroleum Company for awarding the 
job to a subcontractor, who sold KBR overpriced petroleum by- 
products." 
 
¶4.  "Sick Arab Societies" 
Former MP, Shiite Dr. Abdul-Mohsen Jamal wrote in 
independent Al-Qabas (2/11):  "Despite some impartiality 
toward Arabs, most Western intellectuals concur with 
America's vision of importing democracy by force of arms. 
By trying to protect its people and land, even if this means 
occupying the whole Arab world, America is conveying the 
wrong message.  This attitude, whether intentional or not, 
is behind the tragic status quo in the Arab world, and the 
reason for the increase in violence." 
 
¶5.  "Progress is not Easy" 
Kuwait University Political Science Professor, Dr. Shamlan 
Al-Essa, wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (2/10):  "The most 
important resolutions adopted by the GCC conference last 
December were to fight terrorism and to reform educational 
curricula.  Reforming curricula has met with difficulties, 
particularly from parliamentary groups affiliated with the 
Shiites, Salafis, and the Muslim Brotherhood.  The task is 
not unproblematic, because it requires changing minds before 
changing curricula.  Nonetheless, we are confident that 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia will succeed in reforming these 
curricula." 
 
¶6.  "Americanization of Youth" 
Conservative Kuwait University Professor, Dr. Jassem Al- 
Fuhaid, wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (2/10):  "The 
Kuwait Scientific Center recently organized a trip for 
approximately 270 Kuwaiti girls to Camp Arifjan.  The trip 
lacked any scientific aspect.  Every citizen takes pride in 
his or her Arab and Islamic identity, and feels grief toward 
the negative planning of this trip undertaken by the state, 
which attempts to tarnish the Kuwaiti identity with American 
colors.  This is an American raid which does not stop at 
occupying the land but extends to occupying the self."