This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 000539 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/17/2014 
TAGS: PREL PTER IZ KU UNSC
SUBJECT: (U) IRAQ:  NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES' MEETING SUPPORTS 
POLITICAL TRANSITION 
 
 
Classified By: CDA FRANK URBANCIC; REASON:  1.4 (B, D) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Kuwait hosted the Fifth Conference of 
Foreign Ministers of the Neighboring Countries of Iraq 
February 14-15.  The participation of the Iraqis for the 
first time, and the presence of UN Special Envoy Brahimi, 
minimized contentiousness and resulted in success, in the GOK 
view.  The local press noted that the Iraqi flag flew over 
Kuwait for the first time since Liberation in 1991.  The next 
meeting will be held in Egypt, probably in May.  English 
version of final communique faxed to NEA/ARP.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) Kuwait hosted the Fifth Conference of Foreign 
Ministers of the Neighboring Countries of Iraq February 
14-15.  Egypt and Bahrain (Arab League Chair) participated 
along with all the neighbors (Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, 
Syria, Turkey, and Iran).  For the first time, Iraq also 
participated, on equal footing with the other countries (as 
the local press noted, this was the first time the Iraqi flag 
had flown over Kuwait since Liberation in 1991).  All 
participating states were represented by their Foreign 
Ministers.  UNSYG Annan was also represented, by his Special 
Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi.  We have faxed the English version of 
the final communique to NEA/ARP. 
 
¶3.  (C) MFA International Organizations Dept. Deputy Director 
Amb. Aqeel Behbehani, who participated in the drafting 
committee, gave A/DCM a readout February 17.  He said the 
atmosphere had been generally constructive and the GOK was 
very satisfied with the result.  There was less 
contentiousness than at the last such meeting (in Damascus 
November 1-2), thanks largely to the participation of Iraq 
and the helpful presence of the UN's Brahimi.  The GOK had 
coordinated its draft final communique with the Iraqis in 
advance, making it more difficult for other countries to 
quibble.  Even so, the drafting committee had had to work 
until 2:00 a.m. February 15.  Syria had been the most 
difficult.  Behbehani highlighted the following points: 
 
- Syria had wanted to insert language similar to that in the 
Damascus communique, rejecting measures that could lead to 
the division of Iraq.  Saudi FM Prince Saud al-Feisal had 
helped fight off this initiative by noting that the first 
numbered paragraph reaffirmed the territorial integrity of 
Iraq. 
 
- In numbered paragraph 2, Syria had changed the wording from 
"end of the occupation" to "withdrawal of occupying forces"; 
Iraq had not objected, so Kuwait had felt it could not 
either, though Behbehani considered the original wording to 
have been better, given that US and coalition forces will 
remain under a sovereign Iraqi government.  He did not think 
the changed wording made much difference:  once a sovereign 
Iraqi government is in office, the foreign forces will no 
longer be occupying powers. 
 
- In numbered paragraph 4, Syria had adamantly rejected any 
specific mention of the November 15 agreement, even though it 
had voted for UNSCR 1511.  Behbehani said he had jokingly 
asked the Syrian in the drafting committee:  "what if we said 
we condemned the November 15 agreement, would you accept 
mention of it then?" and the Syrian had replied "no." 
 
¶4.  (C) The call for the UNSYG to convene the advisory group 
at ministerial level (numbered paragraph 10) had been 
unanimous.  It was at Kuwait's initiative that the communique 
commended "the decision of the Iraqi people to bring the 
leaders of the previous regime...to justice" and called on 
all states to deny them safe haven.  The GOK had appreciated 
Iraqi FM Zebari's expression of willingness to give written 
security guarantees to the neighbors. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The conferees' meeting with the Amir, Crown Prince 
and Prime Minister was a de-rigueur courtesy call/photo op 
devoid of substance. 
 
¶6. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
URBANCIC