This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000322 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, EAP/PMBS 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT CVIS OTRA PREL PTER CE ECONOMICS
SUBJECT:  ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION WITH DHS SECRETARY 
RIDGE - SRI LANKA AND MALDIVES 
 
REF: SINGAPORE 430 
 
¶1. Ambassador Lunstead looks forward to the roundtable 
discussion with other COMs and DHS Secretary Ridge on 
March 8.  Following is a list of relevant issues in 
Sri Lanka and Maldives, keyed to the format in reftel. 
 
¶A.  Movement of People 
 
In both Sri Lanka and Maldives, we seek to improve the 
host country's ability to police its borders.  In 
particular, we are working to install the TIP/PISCES 
program.  In both countries, we have good cooperation 
with immigration officials but they are hampered by 
inadequate databases and other resource constraints. 
We are also helping Sri Lanka address its trafficking 
in persons problem which largely consists of illegal 
Sri Lankan emigration to the Gulf and to Europe. 
Embassy Colombo maintains an active anti-fraud 
program.  Any visa applicant submitting fraudulent 
documents is turned over to Sri Lankan anti-fraud 
authorities who frequently prosecute. 
 
Our consular section liaises well with regional DHS 
entities but it would be a great help if these 
relationships were systematized and if greater 
information was placed in our visa database.  For 
example, when we get a Cat I FBI or DHS "hit" on a 
visa applicant, it would be extremely helpful if more 
information was in the database to help us make an 
immediate determination on whether the "hit" applies 
to the visa applicant facing the consular officer. 
 
¶B. Screening Goods 
 
Container Security Initiative (CSI): Bolstering its 
aim to become a regional transport hub, Sri Lanka will 
be the first of the CSI Tier 2 ports and the first in 
South Asia.  The majority of containers from Sri Lanka 
go to the US.  In 2003, Sri Lanka and US Customs 
signed a Declaration of Principles and US Customs 
conducted a Port assessment, to identify steps 
necessary to meet CSI standards.  USTDA has funded a 
consultant to identify scanning equipment needs, and 
develop and evaluate RFP documents. 
 
Many US firms have expressed interest in supplying 
scanning equipment, and have teamed with local 
companies to bid on this BOO project. 
 
Areas of concern/opportunity in transport security: 
1)The need to keep the procurement process fair, 
transparent and expeditious; 
2)US Customs has not released the results of its 
assessment visit conducted in Fall 2003, 
keeping the GSL from implementing recommended 
changes; 
3)GSL does not have capacity to design the BOO 
project (TDA is attempting to assist); 
4)Need US Customs to review the consultant's 
report to approve equipment recommendations, 
need to provide feedback before RFP is issued; 
5)Electronic import and export document project 
delayed, but moving; 
6)Sri Lankans are eager for more information on 
on on 
Cargo Screening Rules, Bioterrorism Act 
Regulations, and any other US security 
requirements; 
7)There are plans for major upgrades to the Port 
and Airport, important to incorporate new 
security requirements in design (TDA offered a 
trip to US for aviation decision makers) 
 
Maldives: Maldives is about to implement ELVIS for its 
garment exports to the US. 
 
¶C. DHS Organizational Issues 
 
Post receives quick responses and excellent 
cooperation from many agencies in DHS, especially 
Customs, TSA, and FAA.  It is sometimes not clear, 
though, where responsibilities lie, and what 
communications these agencies have directly with the 
government of Sri Lanka and the Maldives.  The cables 
sent describing responsibilities have been helpful, 
but an overview of the organization, with text or 
graphics, would be very helpful.  Also, including 
Embassies in their communications with the host 
government would assist coordination. 
 
¶D.  Public Diplomacy 
Public affairs outreach on DHS issues is largely 
meaningless unless coupled with funds for training. 
Too often we "preach" to other countries about their 
law enforcement inadequacies without doing enough to 
help them address their shortcomings.  INL, ICITAP and 
DS/ATA training are all tremendously effective.  The 
International Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in 
Bangkok plays a valuable role in improving law 
enforcement capabilities and establishing contacts 
with law enforcement officials.  Unfortunately, there 
is no ILEA for South Asia.  This should be a priority. 
 
¶2. Post appreciates Embassy Singapore's efforts to 
prepare a briefing book and coordinate the discussion. 
 
Lunstead