This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 001995 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION SPECIAL: PRESIDENT BUSH'S MAY 
9 SPEECH AT SOUTH CAROLINA UNIVERSITY 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: The Editor-in-Chief of a prominent Arabic daily 
writes that President Bush's speech is "an indication that 
the US is beginning to follow a serious and balanced policy 
in the region." The absence of Kuwait from the examples of 
freedom in the region cited by President Bush provided more 
ammunition for liberal Kuwaiti commentators who blame 
Islamists in the National Assembly for the "regression of 
Kuwait's democracy." To another writer, this omission 
demonstrates that the US has not given proper credit to 
Kuwait for its role in supporting the war in Iraq, 
especially since "Kuwait is being forced to give concessions 
regarding compensation" for damages from Iraq for the 1990- 
91 occupation. 
 
The same writer questions whether the policies outlined by 
President Bush are genuine or "public relations," as the 
same regimes the US supports are "regimes that resist 
democratic reforms." END SUMMARY. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶2.  "A New Initiative or Public Relations?" 
Former Secretary General of the Kuwait Democratic Forum, 
Ahmad Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (5/11): 
"President Bush's address [on May 9 at the University of 
South Carolina] included many slogans such as `economic 
reforms' and `confronting corruption.' To achieve these 
slogans is not an easy mission simply because our regimes. 
are the ones that resist democratic reforms. Having said 
that, should we expect the US to force our regimes to carry 
out [the US] demands or will Washington try to achieve its 
ends by preserving the regimes in power? In this case, then 
the whole project is no more than a public relations 
campaign to improve the image of the US." 
 
¶3.  "Kuwait's Name Was Not Mentioned" 
Prominent liberal lawyer, Hassan Al-Essa wrote in 
independent Al-Qabas (5/11):  "Kuwait's name was not 
mentioned during President Bush's address at North Carolina 
[sic] University when he talked about a free trade zone in 
the Middle East region. The two words `freedom' and `women' 
were repeated more than once in his speech. President Bush 
gave examples of countries where women have been appointed 
to high positions, including Bahrain, Jordan and Turkey, but 
what about Kuwait which is known for its constitution and 
democracy? . Forty years after the establishment of the 
constitution, Kuwait's democracy has not developed and, as a 
matter of fact, it has regressed due to some of our MPs 
whose priorities were to segregate university students [by 
gender]." 
 
¶4.  "The Continued American Neglect-- Why?" 
Ahmed Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (5/11): 
"As a matter of fact, [President Bush's May 9 speech was] 
not the first time that Kuwait was ignored in a speech. The 
same scenario occurred in Powell's speech last December when 
he talked about the Middle East Partnership Initiative. What 
is most important is the draft law presented by Congressman 
[Nick] Rahall [of West Virginia] to express American 
gratitude to Qatar for its role in the war in Iraq. It is 
difficult to find justification for the deliberate US 
disregard for Kuwait, especially since Kuwait was the point 
of deployment for coalition forces into Iraq. Currently, 
Kuwait is being forced to give concessions regarding 
compensation [from Iraq for the 1990-91 occupation], but at 
the same, the US is neglecting Kuwait." 
 
¶5.  "Bush and Women" 
Liberal Kuwait University Political Science Professor, Dr. 
Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (5/11): 
"Why are we depriving women of their political rights? Why 
have other GCC countries like Qatar and Oman granted women 
their rights? We as a society must realize. we have to adopt 
and work on achieving specific goals [in women's rights] 
otherwise the change will be imposed on us from the 
outside." 
 
¶6.  "On the Mother of All Conflicts" 
Editor-in-Chief of independent Al-Seyassah, Ahmed Al- 
Jarallah wrote: "The nonnegotiable international "Road Map" 
plan, which ends with the establishment of an independent 
Palestinian state, clashes with Israeli ambitions and the 
ideologies of Israel, based on ending the existence of 
Palestinians. This is an indication that the US has reached 
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is also beginning 
to change its image and improve its reputation in the 
region. President Bush's speech [on May 9] is an indication 
that the US is beginning to follow a serious and balanced 
policy in the region with the aim of eliminating the hatred 
directed against the US as a result of its past policies 
that were dictated by the Israeli lobby." 
 
 
URBANCIC