This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KATHMANDU 000185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS AND DS/IP/SA 
LONDON FOR POL - RIEDEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV CASC SOCI NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  MAOISTS CALL OFF GENERAL STRIKE; 
EDUCATIONAL STRIKE THREAT REMAINS IN EFFECT 
 
REF: A. (A) KATHMANDU 0175 
 
     ¶B. (B) 02 KATHMANDU 2456 
 
¶1.  (U) The Maoists issued a press release on February 2 
cancelling the general strike, or "bandh," scheduled to 
commemorate the seventh anniversary of their insurgency on 
February 13-14.  The press statement said the strike is being 
called off in consideration of the "present changing 
circumstances" brought about by the ceasefire announced 
January 29 (Ref A).  At the same time, however, the statement 
urges Maoist cadre to conduct peaceful observances of 
unspecified "programs" to mark the anniversary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Despite the cancellation of the general strike, a 
leader of the Maoist-affiliated All Nepal National 
Independent Students Union (Revolutionary) (ANNISU-R) told 
the local press on January 31 that the "indefinite" 
educational strike called by his organization to begin 
February 13 will go forward.  (Note:  The Government of Nepal 
has not withdrawn the terrorist designation from ANNISU-R as 
it has from the parent wing.  End note.)  The ANNISU-R cited 
what it described as the failure by both the Government and 
the Private and Boarding School Association of Nepal (PABSON) 
to fulfill fully commitments they had made (in response to 
ANNISU-R demands) to end the Maoist strike against private 
schools December 9-23 (Ref B).  A prolonged strike in 
February will disrupt preparations for final examinations, 
which are scheduled to begin the first week of March. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  One of ANNISU-R's major demands during the last 
strike was that private schools slash their fees by up to 25 
percent.  (Note:  The way the agreement was structured, 
schools with the highest fees--and with presumably the most 
affluent students--agreed to the steepest cuts.  Thus, 
paradoxically, the previous ANNISU-R strike succeeded in 
getting tuition cuts for the richest families of students at 
private schools.  End note.)  According to Rajesh Khadga, the 
president of PABSON, about 75 percent of the schools that are 
members of PABSON have reduced their fees "to some extent," 
although not necessarily by the amount agreed.  He said his 
organization is trying to contact ANNISU-R, whose members are 
still underground, about their demands.  He added that PABSON 
member schools will not postpone final exams. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Comment:  As is all too typical, the Maoists 
appear to be talking out of both sides of their mouths, 
calling off a limited general closure as a show of purported 
good will while cynically allowing an indefinite strike 
targeting the most vulnerable elements of the 
population--children--to go forward.  Alternatively, the 
question of bandhs may provide a public demonstration of 
whether the Maoist high command can--or wants to--control the 
actions of younger cadre who may have their own agenda. 
Whether the strike goes ahead as planned--and whether the 
Maoists, as in the past, use violence to enforce it--will be 
important tests of the insurgents' good faith in pursuing 
dialogue.  The Embassy will hold an EAC meeting February 4 to 
review the situation and to make recommendations to the 
international school board. 
MALINOWSKI