This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 003173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ JO
SUBJECT: PRINCE HASSAN HOSTS CONFERENCE OF IRAQI RELIGIOUS 
LEADERS IN AMMAN MAY 27-28 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (U) Former Crown Prince Hassan hosted a conference in 
Amman May 27-28 attended by 20 representatives of Iraqi 
religious communities and 40 international religious figures. 
 Organized by the "World Conference on Religion and Peace," 
(WCRP) participants included Iraqi Shi'ite leaders Ayatollah 
Muqtada al-Sadr, Sayyid Hussain al-Sadr, Ayatollah Mohammed 
al-Sayyid al-Hakim, and individuals associated with Sayyed 
Ali al-Sistani; Sheik Ahmed al-Qubiesy of Iraq's Sunni 
community, and Chaldean Catholic Archbishop of Baghdad 
Emanual Deli.  The theme of the gathering was "Rejecting 
Violence and Promoting Peace with Justice."  Key points 
included a call to address the humanitarian situation in 
Iraq, mutual acceptance and co-existence among all religious 
groups, the role of the UN, and the responsibilities of the 
Coalition forces as the occupying power.  At the conclusion 
of the two-day event, the Conferees issued a joint statement 
(for complete text see para 3.) 
 
¶2. (C) Comment:  The sight of Prince Hassan among an assembly 
of Iraqi religious leaders has, inevitably, caught the 
attention of many in Amman's political salons and, once 
again, has brought to the fore the notion of Hashemite 
ambitions in Iraq.  Whether there is anything to this remains 
to be seen, but it only adds to previous speculation that 
Prince Hassan is seeking ways to raise his visibility 
vis-a-vis Iraq, and is looking for an organizational vehicle 
that could carry him to Baghdad.  End Comment. 
 
¶3. (U) Begin text of Joint Statement: 
 
28 May 2003 
Amman, Jordan 
 
The World Conference on Religions for Peace (WCRP) convened 
an international conference from 27-28 May in the Jordanian 
capital, Amman, to discuss the crisis in Iraq, in view of the 
devastating and catastrophic consequences and repercussions 
resulting from he former regime, the war and the occupation. 
WCRP hosted religious leaders representing all of the 
religious communities in Iraq, together with international 
religious leaders, intellectuals, diplomats and members of 
international humanitarian agencies. 
 
The discussions focused on the humanitarian, political and 
economic dimensions of the crisis in Iraq.  The goals of the 
meeting included examining (1) The current humanitarian 
crisis and the ways in which multireligious cooperation can 
be strengthened as a mode of response. (2) Iraqi religious 
traditions of mutual acceptance and co-existence, which can 
form a basis of for the building of Iraq's future.  (3) 
Governance in Iraq under occupation and its impact on the 
current realities and future expectations. (4) The role of 
the United Nations in a just international order, and its 
relationship to current realities in Iraq.  And, (5) The need 
for cooperation among the religious groups in Iraq in 
building a better future in Iraq. 
 
The Iraqi religious leaders were unanimous in expressing 
appreciation for the good offices of HRH Prince El-Hassan bin 
Talal, the Moderator of WCRP. 
 
The Iraqi religious leaders made the following 
recommendations, which were also endorsed by the full 
conference. 
 
First, that international institutions and agencies increase 
their provision of humanitarian assistance through a greater 
cooperation with Iraqi religious and other social 
institutions, including representatives of women and youth 
groups. 
 
Second, a demand that the Coalition Forces abide by their 
full responsibilities as a de facto Occupying Power in 
compliance with all relevant international treaties, in 
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant 
Hague Conventions on the protection of civilians and the 
provision of the necessary humanitarian requirements for 
occupied populations. 
 
Third, that a temporary Iraqi national government be formed 
as soon as possible to administer the affairs and achieve the 
objectives of the Iraqi people during the transition. 
 
Fourth, that an Iraqi mechanism be formed to provide advice 
to the Special Representative of the United Nations. 
 
Fifth, that the permanent Iraqi government be built on the 
basis of direct, free, democratic elections, a constitution 
and the rule of law that protects equally all religious, 
ethnic and national groupings, while maintaining Iraq's 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. 
Sixth, that WCRP, an international multireligious 
organization accredited to the United Nations, be mandated to 
follow up the decisions and recommendations of this 
conference in partnership with the Iraqi religious leaders. 
 
Seventh, that WCRP be invited to work in partnership with the 
Iraqi religious leaders  regarding future conferences to be 
held in Baghdad and their formation of an Iraqi 
multireligious Council. 
 
Thanks be to God. 
 
End Text of Joint Statement. 
 
 
GNEHM