This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 007006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, PMRSAT AND NEA/NGA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/06/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ PTER
SUBJECT: IRAQ: TURKEY WELL-SITUATED TO SUPPORT COALITION 
EFFORTS TO TRAIN IRAQIS 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric. S. Edelman.  Reasons:  1.5 
(B and D). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Given Turkey's desire to rehabilitate its relations 
with us through cooperation in Iraq and the decision not to 
use Turkish troops as part of the stabilization force, we 
need to identify areas where Turkey -- and the Turkish 
military in particular )- can play a constructive and 
meaningful role in stabilization and reconstruction efforts 
in Iraq.  If not, we run the risk of alienating an important 
NATO ally whose cooperation in Iraq will be important for 
years to come, and at the same time, strengthening the hands 
of those hard-line elements in Turkey who believe Turkey 
should pursue a "go-it alone policy" in Iraq to protects its 
national interests. 
 
 
¶2. (C) One area where Turkey is qualified and prepared to 
play a constructive role in Iraq is training.  Given Turkey's 
breadth of experience and quality of instruction, Turkey is 
well positioned to support the Coalition's efforts to train 
Iraqis, including members of the national army, Jandarma, 
border guards and police (an offer the Turks have already 
made). 
 
 
¶3. (C) Turkey possesses the capability to dispatch training 
teams abroad.  Turkey's positive contributions to our Georgia 
train and equip program are well known and have received high 
marks from American and Georgian officials.  In Afghanistan, 
UK officers were pleased with the contributions the Turkish 
military made to the UK-led initial training efforts of 
600-plus Afghanis in early 2002.  During the past 10 years, 
the military, Gendarmerie and National Police also have sent 
mobile training teams to Albania, Azerbaijan, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Israel, Mongolia, Spain and Uzbekistan; 
 
 
¶4. (C) Turkey also possesses the capability to conduct a wide 
variety of training at its (or her) top-notch training 
facilities, many which have been modeled after those in the 
U.S  The Turkish military's Partnership for Peace (PFP) 
training center in Ankara is one of the premier training 
facilities in the region, having trained over 3,600 military 
personnel from 49 countries during the last five years.  The 
PFP center offers 147 different courses and four seminars 
that address topics such as combating terrorism, stemming 
illegal trafficking and border control/security.  The Turkish 
Army Training and Doctorine Command in Ankara is modeled on 
the US Army Training Command (TRADOC) and is well organized 
and staffed.  Turkey also has a number of quality Jandarma 
training facilities that have received high marks from the 
Department's Bureau of Diplomatic Security.  The more than 30 
Afghan diplomats who participated in a two-month long 
training program conducted by the Foreign Ministry spoke 
highly of their trainers and of the program's content. 
 
 
¶5. (c) Turkey clearly has the experience, capacity and 
quality of trainers to make a siginficant contribution to our 
training efforts in Iraq.  It has a proven track record in a 
number of countries where it might appear that Turks were not 
wanted. Furthermore, it is part of our objectives in Iraq to 
ensure Iraq enjoys positive relations with its neighbors when 
we are gone.  As we have seen with programs like IMET, 
training is a powerful tool in building bonds of trust and 
cooperation.  It is in our interest to ensure that the newly 
created Iraqi army and other organizations have good working 
relationships with their democractic counterparts in Turkey. 
 
 
¶6. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN