This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 001187 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/BCLTV; TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL; 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/22/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV BM ASSK
SUBJECT: ASSK'S HOSPITAL STAY: DAY SIX 
 
REF: RANGOON 1171 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: On September 23, ASSK's doctor again briefed 
diplomats on her post-surgery recovery and reported that 
biopsy reports indicated tissue removed during the operation 
was non-malignant, but that surgery had been the only option 
to address a "pre-cancerous" condition.  Over 150 NLD 
supporters assembled at the hospital today, braving a heavy 
military intelligence presence with hand-written signs of 
support for the NLD leader and the pro-democracy movement. 
The Indonesian Embassy declined to give a briefing to 
diplomats on the Alatas visit, or to affirm whether the envoy 
has requested a meeting with ASSK.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (C) In a now daily routine, ASSK's personal physician, Dr. 
Tin Myo Win, briefed us on September 23 at the Asia Royal 
Cardiac Hospital where she is recuperating from September 19 
surgery.  At our request, and that of the British Embassy, 
diplomats from the French, Italian, German, and Japanese 
embassies joined us for the briefing.  The enlarged 
diplomatic group drew close scrutiny from SPDC military 
intelligence officers who filmed the entire briefing. 
 
¶3. (C) Dr. Tin Myo Win reported that ASSK is eating regular 
meals and is medically capable of receiving visitors, 
although he said "no one has yet been allowed to see her, 
other than her physicians and military liaison officers." 
The doctor said that many supporters had requested an 
opportunity to see ASSK, but that as her physician he 
believed it appropriate for only "one or two special guests" 
to visit (Note: the doctor's implication was that he believes 
ASSK would welcome a visit by Indonesian special envoy 
Alatas, who is currently in Rangoon, and U.N. Special Envoy 
Razali, who is expected in Burma on September 30.  The 
Italian Ambassador told us that he had contacted the 
Indonesian Ambassador to seek a briefing on the Alatas visit 
for E.U. (and U.S.) Embassies.  His Indonesian counterpart 
refused to say whether Alatas has requested a meeting with 
ASSK and said he would consider giving a briefing on the 
Alatas visit "after Bali."  To this, the Italian Ambassador 
responded to the Indonesian, "You must be joking."  ASSK 
confidante Leon de Riedmatten told us he got the same 
reaction from the Indonesian Embassy.  End note). 
 
¶4. (C) Dr. Tin Myo Win told the assembled diplomats that he 
had received post-surgery biopsy reports, which indicated 
that the "organ" he had removed was non-malignant.  However, 
he added that he could not determine what specific disease 
had afflicted ASSK and that surgery had been the only option 
to address her "pre-cancerous" condition (Note: Dr. Tin Myo 
Win will not reveal her specific malady, but media and local 
sources speculate that ASSK had an emergency hysterectomy. 
End note). 
 
¶5. (C) Queried whether ASSK would be returned to detention, 
Dr. Tin Myo Win said he had requested on medical grounds that 
he have daily access to the NLD leader after she is 
discharged from the hospital.  He added that this would be 
most easily accomplished at her home compound, but that this 
decision would be made by the "authorities." 
 
¶6. (C) Over 150 NLD supporters were peacefully assembled 
today in front of the hospital while the diplomats met across 
the street with ASSK's doctor (in the same automotive repair 
shop used for previous briefings; see reftel).  Most of the 
supporters were holding small signs that wished ASSK a speedy 
recovery, although several held photos of the democracy 
leader and signs written in English that read "Freedom from 
All Pain." (Note: Traditionally, such minor expressions of 
protest have resulted in detention and long prison sentences. 
 End note.) 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: We believe that ASSK's doctor is quietly 
attempting to convince the SPDC to transfer her to house 
arrest, rather than return her to detention at an undisclosed 
military compound.  Although our ultimate objective is her 
complete release, house arrest would be a small step in the 
right direction toward her eventual freedom.  End comment. 
Martinez