This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101101Z Jun 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 COLOMBO 001007 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
LONDON FOR POL/RIEDEL 
 
E.O. 12958:   DECL:  06-10-13 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER EAID CE JA NO LTTE
SUBJECT:  Tokyo conference, including D's address, nets 
highly positive reaction; Reaction to PM's speech mixed 
 
Refs:  Colombo 995, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Lewis Amselem, Charge d'Affaires. 
Reasons:  1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  The Tokyo donors conference has 
generally netted a highly positive reaction in Sri 
Lanka.  Media coverage was lavish and upbeat.  D's 
address was considered constructive by all quarters. 
The PM's speech received a mixed reaction, however, with 
some Tamils skeptical of his promise to discuss forming 
an interim structure in the north/east.  The Tamil 
Tigers and the president have not issued a public 
reaction as of late June 10.  Overall, despite the 
absence of the Tigers, the conference and its aid 
pledges went a long way toward restoring some of the 
peace process' lost momentum.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------- 
Positive Reaction to Tokyo 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) The Tokyo donors conference has generally 
received a highly positive reaction in Sri Lanka. 
(Note:  This message covers the first day of the 
June 9-10 conference when most of the major speeches 
were made.  This message does not touch on reaction to 
the "Tokyo Declaration on Reconstruction and Development 
of Sri Lanka," which was issued mid-day local time, 
June 10.)  Media coverage was lavish and basically 
positive.  Newspapers, including English-, Sinhala-, and 
Tamil-language, had banner headlines regarding the 
conference.  In the meantime, there was fulsome coverage 
on local TV channels, and on satellite channels such as 
CNN and BBC.  Most of the media coverage (both press and 
TV) dealt with the addresses given by Prime Minister 
Wickremesinghe and Deputy Secretary Armitage, as well as 
the aid pledges made by conference attendees. 
(Note:  See our media reaction cable for a more detailed 
review of press play.) 
 
---------------------- 
Praise for D's Address 
---------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) While reaction to PM Wickremesinghe's remarks 
was decidedly mixed (see below), the address by Deputy 
Secretary Armitage was considered constructive by all 
 
SIPDIS 
quarters.  Representative comments re his remarks 
included the following: 
 
-- The highly respected Roman Catholic Bishop of Jaffna 
¶T. Savundranayagam told us he was very happy with the 
firm tone of D's comments and the U.S.' clear commitment 
to stand by Sri Lanka during this difficult period.  The 
bishop added that the Deputy Secretary's speech should 
help bring the GSL and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil 
Eelam (LTTE) back to the negotiating table.  He also 
commented that it was very unfortunate that the LTTE had 
decided not to participate in Tokyo, but he hoped the 
group would appreciate the good that came out of the 
conference for the Tamil people. 
 
-- Joseph Pararajasingham, a pro-LTTE MP for the Tamil 
National Alliance, said he thought the Deputy 
Secretary's speech was "quite balanced and careful."  He 
 
SIPDIS 
said he thought the LTTE would review the speech very 
carefully, including its call for the Tigers to return 
to the peace talks. 
 
-- Kethesh Loganathan, a political analyst with the 
Center for Policy Alternatives, a local think-tank, told 
us that he thought D's remarks were very positive.  In 
particular, Loganathan appreciated D's urging of the 
LTTE to work to build trust.  At the same time, 
Loganathan thought it was important that the Deputy 
Secretary had made clear that the international 
 
SIPDIS 
community was not trying to isolate the LTTE, but saw 
the group as a political actor in Sri Lanka that needed 
to transform itself. 
 
(Note:  Alone among the major addresses, the text of D's 
speech was posted on the pro-Tiger website "TamilNet." 
There was no commentary attached to the text.  For more 
re Tiger reaction please see Para 6.) 
 
---------------------- 
PM nets Mixed Reaction 
---------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) The prime minister's speech received a mixed 
reaction.  In discussions with contacts, some Tamils 
were a bit skeptical of the PM's promise to discuss 
forming an interim structure in the north/east.  Joseph 
Pararajasingham, the pro-LTTE MP, for example, told us 
that Tamils "hoped the PM would be able to deliver on 
his promises," but wondered about the follow through by 
the government.  In any case, Pararajasingham -- echoing 
recent comments made by the LTTE itself -- said "it was 
no longer time for talk, but for action" by the GSL.  In 
the meantime, leader of the generally anti-LTTE People's 
Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE) D. 
Sithadthan characterized reaction among Tamils as "wait- 
and-see."  He said he thought that the stalemate that 
was now affecting the peace track would only end when 
aid began flowing into the north and east. 
 
¶5.  (C) Regarding opinion in the majority Sinhalese 
community, a well-respected Buddhist monk, the Venerable 
Wimalaratana, told us that he thought the conference was 
highly successful.  (Note: Wimalaratana is a member of 
the moderate mainstream group of Sri Lanka's monks.)  He 
welcomed the fact that the prime minister was trying to 
bring peace to the country.  That said, Wimalaratana 
said he was concerned that the PM's proposal re an 
interim structure not be construed by the Tigers as 
potentially giving the group political control of the 
north/east.  Rather, it should be seen as giving the 
group simply some administrative powers. 
(Note: Wimalaratana expressed deep annoyance over a 
June 8 incident in Japan when several Sri Lankan men 
interrupted a Buddhist ceremony attended by the PM.  The 
men were arrested by Japanese authorities.  He said the 
disruption was most inappropriate.  Despite reports to 
the contrary, the radical, anti-GSL Janantha Vimukthi 
Peramuna has denied involvement in the incident.) 
(Note:  For comments from the president's office re the 
PM's speech please see Para 7.) 
 
------------------------ 
Tigers are Quiet, so far 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (C) The LTTE has not issued a public reaction to the 
Tokyo conference as of yet.  Pararajasingham, who is 
quite close to the Tigers, told us that he was not sure 
when or if the group would formally make a statement. 
He said he thought the group might forestall any public 
reaction until the government developed a proposal fully 
sketching out its idea for an interim structure in the 
north and east.  He added, however, that it was possible 
that Anton Balasingham, the LTTE's London-based 
spokesman, might use "TamilNet" to make some sort of 
announcement re the outcome of the conference before 
that. 
 
---------------------------------- 
No Reaction yet from the President 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) President Kumaratunga and her People's Alliance 
(PA) party have also avoided publicly discussing Tokyo 
thus far.  (Note:  The president shares a very tense 
cohabitation relationship with the PM.)  Presidential 
advisor Eric Fernando told us that the president has 
been in Kandy of late and had only returned to Colombo 
last night (June 9).  He was not sure when or if she 
might comment on Tokyo.  Fernando went on to say that he 
felt that the prime minister's speech yielded "nothing 
new."  He added that former foreign minister Lakshman 
Kadirgamar, probably the president's closest advisor, 
felt the same way.  Fernando remarked that the president 
had proposed a similar interim structure concept way 
back in August 2000 and it was by now an old idea. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Despite the absence of the Tigers, the Tokyo 
conference clearly went a long way toward restoring some 
of the peace process' lost momentum.  The attention 
given to Sri Lanka by such well-known international 
actors as the U.S. (through Deputy Secretary Armitage) 
and Japan (through Prime Minister Koizumi) has been 
noted and deeply appreciated.  Moreover, Sri Lankans 
have welcomed the large-scale assistance pledges, 
especially the astronomical USD one billion announced by 
Japan, and also the U.S.' and EU's generous amounts.  At 
this point, the question is whether the Tigers will come 
back to the peace talks in the aftermath of the 
conference.  The answer to whether the LTTE wants to 
return to the ballgame remains very unclear.  As of this 
time, however, there is little indication that the group 
is rethinking its recent hard-line posture.  The 
conference, however, is just wrapping up and perhaps the 
good vibrations emanating from Tokyo will spur the group 
to a change of heart.   END COMMENT. 
 
¶9.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
AMSELEM