This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000556 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS(FOR JWALLER); SA/PD (FOR LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, 
WREINCKENS); SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT: MEDIA PLAY - IRAQ 
 
REF:  Colombo 550 
 
¶1. Under the front-page headline, "CBK hits out at Bush," 
the DAILY MIRROR (independent English daily, islandwide 
circulation) pursues a leitmotiv that often appears in the 
Sri Lankan media's coverage of the war:  mixing local 
issues with news from Iraq.  (See reftel, which reported 
that an editorial in the DAILY NEWS (government-owned 
English daily, islandwide circulation) wondered why some 
Sri Lankans are simultaneously pro-peace in Iraq and 
"deafeningly silent" regarding peace in Sri Lanka itself.) 
According to "CBK hits out," President Kumaratunga has 
accused the USG of "waging war against Iraq ... while 
asking Sri Lanka to go ahead with peace talks with a 
terrorist organization [i.e., the LTTE]." 
 
¶2. Other English dailies are satisfied with either pix of 
"smoke billows from an explosion in ... Saddam's guest 
palace" or a "map of `Day 12.'"  The vernacular press, in 
contrast, gives heavy coverage to what one Sinhala headline 
describes as "U.S. soldiers kill seven Iraqi women and 
children."  The same story appears in the Tamil dailies 
under headlines such as "Coalition forces fire near 
checkpoint; 7 Iraqis ... killed" and "Fearing suicide 
bombers, innocent civilians shot dead." 
 
¶3. Although Sri Lanka's English- and Tamil-medium 
editorialist are silent today, a brief editorial appears in 
LAKBIMA (independent Sinhala daily, islandwide coverage). 
Dilating on "The principle of refusing war,"  LAKBIMA's 
editors say: 
 
"Our Prime Minister has said that he is not prepared to go 
on with a war that would never bring victory to us ... not 
prepared to sacrifice the country's economy, and the future 
of its children. 
 
"Lovers of war can never bring a solution to a problem.  We 
can eradicate war only if we realize this truth." 
 
Wills