This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000873 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR AF/W AND INL/AAE - E.FLOOD 
 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KCRM SNAR PGOV KDEM PREL NI
SUBJECT:  NIGERIA: RIOT CONTROL EQUIPMENT PRESENTATION 
 
 
¶1. During an April 8 turnover ceremony, Ambassador 
Jeter presented the Inspector General of Police (IGP), 
Tafa Balogun, with riot control and other equipment 
valued at more than $300,000.  The donation, part of 
the ICITAP Civil Disorder Police Reform Training 
Program, included helmets, shields, batons, handcuffs 
and other items.  Jeter commended the participants and 
others involved in making the training possible and 
challenged the NPF to make Nigeria proud by utilizing 
the training they received in a professional, 
responsible and non-partisan manner during the 
elections. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) The IGP thanked the Ambassador and the 
American Government for the contribution and for being 
an active training partner of the NPF.  He applauded 
the excellent relationship between the U.S. and 
Nigeria and remarked that the best way for the NPF to 
reciprocate was to demonstrate their professionalism. 
The IGP remarked that he was a believer in the "train 
the trainer" concept as he himself had been a 
recipient and later a trainer for six years of his 
career. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The IGP's comments indicate that Balogun may 
have become a committed convert to the benefits of 
bilateral cooperation on law enforcement.  When he 
ascended to his current position last year, Balogun 
was not an enthusiastic supporter of our police 
training efforts.  However, Balogun now appears to 
have made a welcomed about face.  In his remarks 
Balogun reiterated his eight-point strategy for law 
enforcement that included training as a major element 
and assured the Ambassador of his continued 
cooperation.  The IGP also expressed his gratitude to 
the LAPD for the donation of the protective vests made 
possible through the efforts of Los Angeles Police 
Capt Patrick Findley adding this was "just the 
beginning" of the level of cooperation expected 
between the U.S. and Nigeria. 
 
 
JETER