This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 003121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AC/CB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NL ASEC OTRA PARM
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC): COUNTRY 
CLEARANCE FOR RON NELSON 
 
REF: SECSTATE 342709 
 
This is CWC-136-03. 
 
¶1. Del grants country clearance to the following individual 
traveling to The Hague as a consultant on national 
implementation measures to the OPCW Technical Secretariat: 
 
-- Ron Nelson 
-- State 
-- Arrive: Jan 3, 2004 
-- Depart: April 3, 2004 
 
Del confirms hotel reservations at the Dorint, Johan de 
Wittlaan 42-44, phone: (070) 416-9111, fax:  (070) 416-9100. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Visitors who need unescorted access into secure 
areas of the Mission must provide proof of at least a secret 
clearance. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Inter-agency security standards prohibit the 
introduction or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and 
software at all USG diplomatic facilities.  Cell phones, palm 
pilots, radios and other convenience electronics are 
prohibited in all secure areas of the Mission.  Travelers who 
anticipate having special needs in terms of either access or 
computer usage should contact the RSO office before arriving 
at post. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Post provides the following threat assessment for 
The Netherlands: The Department of State on November 21, 2003 
issued a worldwide caution. The U.S. Government remains 
deeply concerned about the security of U.S. citizens 
overseas.  U.S. citizens are cautioned to maintain a high 
level of vigilance, to remain alert and to take appropriate 
steps to increase their security awareness.  We are seeing 
increasing indications that Al-Quaida is preparing to strike 
U.S. interests abroad.  Al-Quaida and its associated 
organizations have struck in the Middle East in Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia and in Europe in Istanbul, Turkey.  We therefore 
assess that other geographic locations could be venues for 
the next round of attacks.  We expect Al-Quaida will strive 
for new attacks designed to be more devastating than the 
September 11 attack, possibly involving non-conventional 
weapons such as chemical or biological agents.  We also 
cannot rule out that Al-Quaida will attempt a second 
catastrophic attack within the U.S. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Terrorist actions may include, but are not limited 
to, suicide operations, hijackings, bombings or kidnappings. 
These may also involve commercial aircraft and maritime 
interests, and threats to include conventional weapons, such 
as explosive devices agents. Terrorists do not distinguish 
between official and civilian targets.  These may include 
facilities where American citizens and other foreigners 
congregate or visit, including residential areas, clubs, 
restaurants, places of worship, schools, hotels, outdoor 
recreation events or resorts and beaches.  U.S. citizens 
should remain in a heightened state of personal security 
awareness when attendance at such locations is unavoidable. 
Please consult the Department's web site for text: 
http://travel.state.gov. 
 
¶6.  (U)  A concern for visitors is crime.  Most crimes 
against official Americans are limited to pick-pocketing and 
luggage theft.  Theft from automobiles and hotel rooms is not 
unknown.  Recently, theft of laptop computers has increased, 
especially at Schiphol Airport and major train stations.  The 
thieves operate in small groups that target travelers, are 
determined and well practiced at distraction theft.  Several 
official travelers have been victimized lately, losing 
personal and unclassified government computers, valuable 
software and data.  Travelers are reminded regulations 
require the use of the diplomatic pouch for shipment of 
classified equipment and information. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Streets can be walked in relative safety, but as in 
any U.S. urban area, caution should be exercised after dark 
in the more populated cities of The Hague, Amsterdam, and 
Rotterdam.  Red-light districts and public transportation 
hubs are common locations for incidents of street crime. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Ito sends. 
SOBEL