This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000219 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
DEPT FOR DRL and EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PINS VM
SUBJECT:  MFA update on some detainees of concern 
 
Ref:  A.  FBIS JPP20030109000137  B. HCMC 052 
-     C.  02 HANOI 3096 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  In response to inquiry from poloff on January 28, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs International Organization 
Department Senior Expert Hong Bich Lien provided updates on 
the status of several prominent activists whose detentions 
have sparked international and USG concern.  She promised on 
January 29 to provide further information about reported 
detentions of three relatives and one associate of Father 
Nguyen Van Ly. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Pham Que Duong and Tran Van Khue:  Ms. Lien 
confirmed that Duong and Khue are under investigative 
detention (refs b and C), without disclosing their current 
location(s).  She added that the investigation was for 
"transmitting secret documents abroad" and for "receiving 
money from outside (overseas) for their activities."  A 
January 9 Foreign Ministry public statement (ref a) had 
confirmed that the two were under detention, but only 
characterized them as "caught redhanded while carrying out 
activities that seriously violate Vietnamese laws."  Ms. 
Lien stated categorically that Pham Que Duong's wife was 
not/not under detention.  She promised to check whether 
anyone else had been detained along with Duong after poloff 
noted a report that police had detained a third person, Ho 
Thu, along with Duong and his wife (ref c). 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Pham Hong Son:  Ms. Lien said that she believed 
that Son's case had gone to the Procuracy, indicating that a 
trial may take place soon after the Tet holidays.  Poloff 
cited reports about Son's difficulties in obtaining legal 
representation.  Ms. Lien agreed to send a note to the 
Procuracy enquiring about his case, especially whether Son 
has now been able to hire a lawyer. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Nguyen Vu Binh:  Ms. Lien had no information 
about Binh, confessing that she was handling so many 
inquiries that she had lost track of his case.  She promised 
to check with either the Ministry of Public Security or the 
Procuracy about Binh's current status. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Le Chi Quang:  Embassy also asked MFA to check on 
the status of Quang in prison, especially in regard to his 
health, access to medical treatment, and prison conditions. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Comment:  MFA/IO's willingness to provide some 
information is welcome, even if the news is not encouraging. 
The apparent charges against Duong and Khue are especially 
worrisome, as they suggest probable heavy sentences. 
BURGHARDT