This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 001684 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2013 
TAGS: PREL PARM PTER ETTC YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: WEAPONS BUYBACK REDUX 
 
REF: SANAA 1590 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Brigadier General Shater, under orders from 
President Saleh, held a 7/2 viewing of ROYG proceeds from 
recent weapons buyback collection efforts for the Ambassador 
and other USG officials (reftel).  On July 6, Shater met with 
the Ambassador to ascertain the U.S. reaction to the display 
and to discuss ROYG's ongoing arms control strategies, 
including the weapons buyback program.  Also in attendance 
were DATT, PolOff (notetaker), and Ossami al-Shami from 
Presidential Protocol.  (Comment:  Al-Shami's presence 
indicates the President's personal oversight of this recent 
exchange.  End comment.) 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Ambassador said that initiatives like the weapons 
buyback program are extremely important because of reports 
indicating that arms and munitions from Yemen were used in 
the Riyadh attacks.  However, citing similar buyback 
programs' creation of secondary markets, the Ambassador 
stressed that the U.S. will not attempt to purchase billions 
of dollars of weapons worldwide --  but the U.S. will help 
with technical assistance. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Ambassador reiterated the April and 7/2 offer of 
assistance (reftel) in the form of a DIA team.  This team 
would consist of specialists capable of helping ROYG 
catalogue current stockpiles and future acquisitions.  This 
data could then be incorporated into a database that would 
allow both ROYG and the U.S. to ascertain the origins of 
weapons purchased through the weapons buyback program, seized 
at borders, or used in terrorist incidents worldwide.  (Note: 
 Depending upon the findings and recommendations of the DIA 
Team, this may include the acquisition and installation of 
computer and commo systems capable of sustaining a database. 
End note.) 
 
¶4.  (C)  Shater said he would take the U.S. offer to the 
President.  He also noted that he believes draft arms control 
legislation, designed to tighten controls on illicit trade 
and ban the possession of heavy weapons, will be passed by 
parliament this session -- despite political and popular 
opposition. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  Comment:  This carefully orchestrated exchange 
shows ROYG's commitment to controlling the illicit arms trade 
and the President's desire to secure external funding to 
expand ongoing efforts.  The continued removal of weapons 
from the local market, legislation prohibiting their 
possession, and the potential for increased technical 
capabilities as offered by a DIA Team are encouraging 
developments.  End comment. 
 
 
HULL