This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003989 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TDA FOR STEINGASS/SIGLER 
USDOC 4520/ITA/MAC/ONE/PTHANOS 
E STAFF FOR CADE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS EAID JO XF
SUBJECT: ARAB TELECOM REGULATORS INITIATIVE 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Telecommunications Regulatory Commission chief 
Muna Nijem approached USAID director and Econ Couns on 
June 30 about U.S. Government support for an effort she 
is leading to create a network of Arab telecommunications 
regulators.  Nijem said the idea to create a network was 
developed during a regional ITU conference in Algeria 
earlier this year.  Jordan will organize an initial, 
organizational meeting in Amman August 28.  (Algeria has 
the regional ITU chair for 2003, which Jordan will take 
over in 2004.) 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  According to Nijem, the network will be a 
resource for the development of pro-competitive, consumer- 
focused telecom regulation in the region.  She said it 
would address issues including how operators negotiate 
compatible licenses across borders and regional numbering 
concerns.  In addition to helping regulators operate more 
efficiently, Nijem said that the rationale for the 
initiative was to increase regional economic and 
political cooperation. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Nijem asked for assistance prior to the late 
August meeting in pulling together ideas for how a 
network could operate.  Basically, this would mean 
bringing in one outside consultant for a one-month period 
to prepare an agenda for the meeting.  Her initial 
thoughts included creating a web-based "virtual" system 
for sharing ideas among network members as well as 
periodic workshops and seminars.  A network might also 
pool resources to bring in outside experts to address 
regional needs.  Nijem expected that once the August 
meeting had agreed on a general vision, the group would 
commission a full-blown study of how a network would 
operate.  She thought that organizations like the World 
Bank or TDA would be asked to help fund this longer-term 
study. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Comment:  USAID Amman will look into the 
feasibility of bringing in a short-term consultant to 
help Nijem prepare for the August meeting.  Post suggests 
that possibilities for longer-term support for this 
initiative under MEPI and by TDA be studied closely. 
Following the recent acquisition of Jordan's "Fastlink" 
mobile operator by Kuwait's MTC, and MTC's partnership 
with Vodafone in Bahrain, plus Orascom's expansion in 
Egypt and North Africa and the various possibilities in 
Iraq, the outlines of a regional mobile network are 
emerging.  By encouraging greater connectivity within the 
region and between the region and the rest of the world, 
this initiative would fit perfectly with our broader 
economic goals for the region, particularly MEFTA.  Nijem 
herself is a forward-leaning, former Motorola executive 
who favors U.S. technology and is among the most senior 
women in the Jordanian government. 
GNEHM