This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L LAGOS 001866 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2004 
TAGS: PINS EPET PGOV ASEC PHUM NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: WARRI: A PAUSE IN THE VIOLENCE? 
 
 
REF: ABUJA 1441 
 
 
Classified By: RHINSON-JONES for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) There has been no serious violence reported in Warri 
for almost two weeks, other than what has been described as 
an inter-factional "skirmish" over the weekend of August 30 
in the settlement of Ugbomro lying between Warri and Effurun. 
 Military patrols sent to restore peace found the body of a 
Police Inspector said to have been ambushed. On Thursday, 
September 4, Halliburton's security director described the 
situation in Warri as an "uneasy quiet." 
 
 
¶2. (C) He also told Econoff that the Itshekiri are on the 
verge of an attack against the Ijaw in retaliation for an 
earlier Ijaw attack.  He said he informed the local military 
and police commanders of what he knows.  He thinks it could 
happen this weekend.  Others in the Warri business community 
are also discussing this report and are making arrangements 
for the safety and security of their employees. 
 
 
¶3. (C) At least one newspaper has reported that a serious 
clash is expected this weekend in Warri.  There are also 
reports that the Nigerian military has moved helicopters in 
the area, and has been flying low altitude runs over the city 
and environs.  A Lagos businessman with close ties to Warri 
told Econoff that the presence of military helicopters has 
fueled rumors that the military expects a large scale clash 
and is trying to deter against it.  However, he also suggests 
that the entire situation is rumor only: in his opinion, no 
faction ever announces its attacks in advance, and no one can 
ever predict what will happen between the feuding ethnic 
groups in Warri. 
 
 
4.(C) Meanwhile, the boat loaded with Halliburton equipment 
hijacked on August 18 by Ijaw "pirates" (reftel) was released 
this week through peaceful mediation by the Delta state 
government.  The expected military action never occurred. 
The captain and crew held hostage went unharmed and returned 
to Forcados.  Halliburton has not yet recovered its equipment. 
HINSON-JONES