This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RANGOON 000228 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV BM ASSK
SUBJECT: AUNG SAN SUU KYI AVOIDS JAIL, CALLS REGIME'S 
BLUFF 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Aung San Suu Kyi was found guilty of 
wrongful restraint February 21 in a civil suit brought by 
her cousin.  The NLD Chairman says the court's judgment was 
"definitely politically motivated," and her lawyer outlined 
several procedural irregularities.  Daw Suu reportedly 
objected to the judgment and the process and was prepared to 
go to jail for a week rather than admit guilt and pay a 
nominal fine.  As two thousand people crowded around the 
courthouse, the government backed off, issuing a "suspension 
of judgment" decree, handing Aung San Suu Kyi another 
principled victory, for the time being at least.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Incident 
 
On May 8, 2002, two days after Aung San Suu Kyi was released 
from house arrest, her maternal cousin, Soe Aung, appeared 
on her housing compound and accosted her in front of the NLD 
leadership.  He punched her and was banished from the 
compound.  She sued him for "outraging the modesty of a 
woman" and he counter-sued her for wrongful restraint.  The 
cousin had once lived in a small building on the family 
compound, and apparently wanted to move back in. 
 
¶3. (SBU) "Politically Motivated" 
 
At a February 21 press conference at NLD HQ, Aung San Suu 
Kyi's lawyer and the assembled party leadership detailed the 
events of the day.  Both ASSK and her cousin were found 
guilty and received small fines or short jail terms.  ASSK 
objected to the process and judgment, refusing to pay the 
small fine and claiming she would go to jail for the seven 
days if necessary.  Her lawyer detailed some legal 
irregularities.  When a U.S. reporter asked if the NLD 
leadership thought the case was politically motivated, the 
NLD Chairman answered, "It definitely was politically 
motivated." 
 
¶4. (SBU) How's That? 
 
Soe Aung is said to have been put up to this by the regime. 
Local political analysts tell us a number of ASSK's family 
members have been approached by the SPDC and encouraged to 
bring lawsuits against her.  Entangling her in tawdry civil 
litigation with family members would diminish her status of 
international icon.  We know of at least one other suit 
filed against her by a family member. One also wonders how 
Soe Aung could have gotten access to her compound, isolated 
as it is by tight police checkpoints. 
 
¶5. (SBU) So What? 
 
What was perhaps a regime-supported smear effort has 
backfired, as ASSK once again stood by her principles and 
called the government's bluff.  Given the tension in the 
city arising from the ongoing banking crisis, the 
authorities perhaps sensed that this event could have 
sparked trouble.  The regime has backed down for now, but we 
note the judgment was only suspended, not overturned. 
MCMULLEN