This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000881 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR PALMER TO CENTCOM J5 
STATE FOR TFIZ, PM, WHA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
JCS FOR J5 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS IZ HO
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA BELIEVES HONDURAN 
CONGRESS WILL APPROVE GOH OFFER OF POST-WAR TROOPS FOR IRAQ 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 862 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) On April 7 Honduran Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias gave me a letter offering to 
provide Honduran troops for post-war humanitarian needs in 
Iraq (see reftel).  FM Perez-Cadalso told me that that both 
President Ricardo Maduro and Minister of Defense Federico 
Breve had approved the offer.  The letter specifically offers 
to participate in the humanitarian aspects of the 
reconstruction of Iraq, including sending troops who 
specialize in demining and peacekeeping troops (see paragraph 
2 for an informal translation of the letter, which was faxed 
to CENTCOM and the State Department April 7).  While the 
letter notes that this deployment offer is contingent on 
congressional approval, as required by the Honduran 
constitution, FM Perez-Cadalso said he does not think that 
such an approval will be a problem.  I fully concur with this 
assessment.  While such a request will be somewhat 
controversial and there will be opponents in congress, the 
Embassy believes that congress will approve a request to 
deploy troops for peacekeeping and/or demining in post-war 
Iraq.  I do not expect the GOH to seek congressional approval 
until after the war is over and the USG had made a more 
specific request for Honduran troops.  However, I recommend 
that CENTCOM proceed immediately with "reading-in" the 
Honduran military liaison, COL Carlos Andino Cobos, so that 
he can work with CENTCOM to determine the most appropriate 
contribution of Honduran troops for post-war Iraq. 
 
Text of Letter Offering Troops for Post-War Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin text of informal translation of FM 
Perez-Cadalso letter to Ambassador: 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C. 
April 3, 2003 
 
Mr. Ambassador: 
 
I have the honor to address Your Excellency and request your 
good offices to convey to your government the disposition of 
the Government of Honduras to make the following offer: 
 
¶1. Once the war against Iraq is over, with the expected 
triumph of the coalition forces, Honduras could participate 
in the humanitarian efforts tending to the reconstruction of 
that country in two specific areas, providing: a) personnel 
trained in demining work, and b) personnel trained in 
peacekeeping operations. 
 
¶2. It is understood that, in the event this offer were to be 
accepted, the deployment of the mentioned military personnel, 
by constitutional mandate, has to be authorized by the 
National Congress acting upon a request from the Executive 
Power. 
 
I take this opportunity to reiterate to Your Excellency the 
assurances of my highest esteem and consideration. 
 
/s/ 
 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
 
Excellent Mr. 
Larry Palmer 
Ambassador of the United States of America 
Tegucigalpa 
 
End text of informal translation of FM Perez-Cadalso letter 
to Ambassador. 
Palmer