This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

191420Z Jun 03C O N F I D E N T I A L HARARE 001252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
DS/OP/AF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2008 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINR ZI MDC
SUBJECT: MDC MAKES PLANS WHILE WAITING FOR ITS LEADER TO BE 
RELEASED 
 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Peggy Blackford for reasons 1.5b/d 
 
Summary 
--------- 
 
¶1. (C)  Although the MDC is clearly missing its leader who 
continues to be imprisoned on new treason charges, it remains 
united and strong according to Special Presidential Advisor 
Gandi Mudzingwa.  Criticisms leveled against the MDC 
leadership are just that, criticisms, not indications of any 
split in the party.  There has been no progress in 
negotiations via any of the actors who have hoped to bring 
the parties to the table.  The South Africans may be talking 
to Mugabe but, in Mudzingwa's opinion, are ignoring the MDC. 
The MDC, in the meanwhile, is gearing up for district 
elections in August and is badly in need of funds.  It 
appears that other new initiatives will wait for the release 
of Tsvangirai however. 
 
Status of MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai - Morale at the MDC 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶2. (C) At a lunch with Gandi Mudzingwa, Special Advisor to 
Tsvangirai, PolOff asked how the MDC leader was faring. 
 
SIPDIS 
Mudzingwa said that he seemed to be holding up well although 
no one but his wife and his attorneys have been able to see 
him in the remand prison.   Mudzingwa repeated the story we 
have been told by Tsvangirai's attorney that the judgment on 
bail for the new treason charges is ready and said that he 
believed that it would be handed down this afternoon.  Later 
inquiries to the attorney, however, suggested that that may 
have been wishful thinking on Mudzingwa's part. 
 
¶3. (C) Asked about criticism of the MDC by civil society, 
which questioned the appropriateness of demonstrations, and 
discontent among the youth wing of the party, which has 
threatened to demonstrate against Tsvangirai's continued 
imprisonment, Mudzingwa said these were the complaints of a 
few individuals and flatly denied any serious threats of 
splits within the party.  He said that he personally had been 
a bit downcast by the failure of the demonstrations but upon 
reflection had concluded that the stayaway had been much 
better than the one in March.  Therefore, on the whole, he 
was content with the outcome of the mass action. 
 
No progress towards negotiations 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) PolOff queried whether there had been any contacts 
from any of the various parties that have been trying to 
bring about negotiations.  Mudzingwa confirmed the church 
leaders had been in touch with the party leadership on June 9 
as reported septel but denied that there had been any contact 
at all from the South Africans, although he conceded that the 
SAG might well have been speaking to the GOZ.  He criticized 
the SAG approach, saying that they want to limit their 
contacts to Mugabe and ZANU-PF and seem to think that the MDC 
will simply agree to whatever ZANU wants as long as there is 
some sort of transition. 
 
In the meantime, MDC makes plans 
--------------------------------- 
 
5.(C)  Mudzingwa  said that the party was currently hard at 
work trying to find candidates for all the contested district 
elections scheduled for August.  In some ZANU-PF strongholds 
it was proving tough to find a candidate willing to risk 
pressure and threats of violence.  Finances were getting more 
difficult and the party was considering sending a spokesman 
to the US with the hope of raising funds.  He hinted that he 
would like USG support in such a venture.  PolOff told him 
that was impossible but said she was sure many human rights 
and other US based organizations would be willing to help. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (C) Although the MDC remains cohesive, without 
Tsvangirai's leadership, it seems to lack a certain spark and 
 
SIPDIS 
to be marking time rather than moving forward.  All the more 
reason why it is crucial that Tsvangirai receive his 'get out 
of jail" card ASAP. 
SULLIVAN