This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001517 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (CAMP, WALLER), SA/PD (SCHWARTZ, SCENSNY), 
SSA/PAS 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  SRI LANKAN MEDIA ACCUSE U.S. of 
"SELF-INFLICTED WOUNDS" 
 
 
¶1.  In a 9/1 editorial, "Self-inflicted wounds," the DAILY 
MIRROR (independent English daily), launched one of the 
most vigorous criticisms of U.S. policy seen in Sri Lanka's 
mainline press since the occupation of Iraq.  "Self- 
inflicted wounds" accuses the U.S. of searching for "a new 
bogeyman" following the demise of the USSR, and finding 
"the ideal in Muslim fundamentalists."  As a result, 
Islamic "fanatics" are in ascendancy and "America and its 
allies in Iraq are now reaping the whirlwind," pursuing 
policies that "breed more Bin Ladens in the Arab world and 
... threat[en] ... cultured and freedom-loving people 
everywhere."  The MIRROR concludes by suggesting that the 
U.S. avoid the kind of "sinister interests" that "created 
the Vietnam quagmire" and "focus more on justice and fair 
play as was the clear case with its founding fathers...." 
 
¶2. "Self-inflicted wounds" follows verbatim: 
 
Quote. 
 
We have been vilifying regularly our political leaders for 
making a mockery of democracy and our nation since 
independence. Looking beyond our role models in US and UK 
we find some actions of their leaders too border on lunacy. 
Their so-called objective media is no better in dancing to 
the jingoistic tunes of their leaders, especially in the 
invasion of Iraq. 
 
Fortunately for the world sanity in the west is not totally 
lost. We have the modern day Western culture capital of the 
world, France, which, though led by a centre right 
President, is able to see the world with a cultured 
measure. 
 
Then we have the economic powerhouse of Europe, Germany, 
led by centre left Social Democrats, having the conviction 
to stand their ground. There were also lesser players like 
Russia, Canada and Belgium. Despite all types of cajoling 
and even being vilified by sections of western media, they 
rightly stood up to say No to the hasty plans of Bush and 
Blair. History may have already vindicated these naysayers. 
 
For specially the economic-military machine that really 
wields power in America, with the demise of the Communist 
threat and the collapse of the East -bloc, they were really 
in search of a new bogeyman. They found the ideal in Muslim 
fundamentalists they themselves helped to activate to fight 
the Russians after their incursion into Afghanistan to prop 
up a puppet regime. Instead of trying to correct the wrong 
they helped to create with the liberation of Afghanistan, 
the US in particular and the West in general slept on their 
duty. The result was obvious. 
 
In isolation Muslim religious schools that sprouted like 
mushrooms across Afghanistan and Pakistan, which served as 
the main base to oust the Russians, kept on churning 
fanatics. All that these fanatics required was the shout 
Allah o' Akbar to go into any type of action. 
 
America and its allies in Iraq are now reaping the 
whirlwind. Saddam Hussein was an irritant, but he was also 
a secular person. Arrogant western countries, could not 
appreciate the fact he was ruling a volatile country. 
Luckily the West has begun to see that it is to their 
advantage to have left-leaning rulers like Mummar Gaddafi 
of Libya. But their realising the truth may be a bit too 
late. The West must realise the Arab masses are no longer 
fooled. They want to be in charge of their destiny. The 
West must stop using the corrupt and friendly regimes they 
help to stay in power, who would only help breed more Bin 
Ladens in the Arab world and a threat to all cultured and 
freedom-loving people everywhere. 
 
More than anything else America should no longer try to 
legitimise whatever the Israeli does. The cycle of violence 
must stop with the Israelis. Premier Ariel Sharon's policy 
of always firing the last shot has to end. The ground rule 
must be, as long as there are no suicide bombs or attacks 
taking place in Israel, there must be no assassination of 
hard line activists among Palestinians. Then like elsewhere 
in the world, encourage doves from both sides by supporting 
them. Like the West often tells us we like to tell them to 
give peace a chance. West Asia badly needs a respite. 
 
Sinister interests in Washington too created the Vietnam 
quagmire. For greater involvement America staged the Tonkin 
Gulf incident, a fictitious attack that never took place. 
Similarly in this war we were told of Sadam's weapons of 
mass destruction, that they claimed could be activated 
within 45 minutes. 
 
America is yet the great land of opportunity. It is time 
the American ruling elite focus more on justice and fair 
play as was the clear case with its founding fathers, and 
now with the world's wealth and especially its oil fields. 
 
End quote 
 
¶3. Comment.  The DAILY MIRROR is the flagship publication 
of the Wijeya group, publishers of the SUNDAY TIMES 
(independent English weekender), LANKADEEPA (independent 
Sinhala daily), and SUNDAY LANKADEEPA (independent Sinhala 
weekender).  The Wijeya Group's newspapers are among the 
most respected in Sri Lanka.  End comment. 
 
LUNSTEAD