This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 001479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, DRL 
COMMERCE FOR ITA JEAN KELLY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2013 
TAGS: SCUL PINS PGOV PHUM BM
SUBJECT: ONWARD BUDDHIST SOLDIERS! 
 
REF: RANGOON 1361 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In Burma, the Buddhist monkhood is a force 
second in size and power only to the ruling military.  The 
Burmese government has coerced and cajoled the country's most 
senior abbots into political line, thus indirectly 
controlling the rank and file.  However, the monkhood is a 
large and diverse group, and the senior abbots may not have 
the respect they once commanded.  Thus, the GOB's ironclad 
control over the whole group may be impermanent.  End summary. 
 
Proverb: "Where Civil Power Fails, Religious Power is 
Required" 
 
¶2. (U) At 400,000 strong, Burma's Buddhist monkhood, or 
sangha, is a force matched only in manpower by the equally 
robust Burmese military.  This number does not include the 
estimated 100,000 Buddhist nuns, women who have taken the 
tonsure to receive religious education, but who have no 
political power and do not receive the same respect from 
society as do their male counterparts.  The sangha is highly 
revered (as the military was) and is a vital element of 
Burmese history and national identity.  Like the military, 
the sangha defies easy categorization and generalizations. 
However, there is an organizational structure and some basic 
delineations that clarify the political role played by this 
important civil society group. 
 
¶3. (U) Traditionally, the reigning civil authority is 
reluctant to take direct action against the monkhood. 
Instead, orders and guidance impacting the sangha come 
directly from a 10-member ruling committee and its 47-member 
working committee.  Thus, control of these committees, 
comprised of senior abbots from around the country, is 
essential to control of the country's monks.  Not 
surprisingly, the GOB's Ministry of Religious Affairs 
hand-picks the committee members. 
 
A Sect for Every Monk 
 
¶4. (SBU) Beneath the state-controlled governing bodies, the 
monkhood is divided into three main sects: Thudamma, 
Shwekyin, and Nget Twin. 
 
-- Thudamma:  The largest and most influential sect. 
Thudamma is comparatively liberal in discipline and doctrine 
and is close to the government.  The sect's leaders are 
generally chosen because of a close relationship with SPDC 
officials.  The GOB often gives abbots from this sect 
preference when filling vacancies on the national sangha 
committees. 
 
-- Shwekyin: The second largest sect.  Shwekyin is much more 
conservative, requiring its members to practice austerity and 
strict adherence to Buddhist principles.  Though leaders of 
this sect tend to strike a politically neutral position, 
dealing with both the GOB and the democratic opposition, the 
Burmese leadership lends support to this sect because of its 
size and its solid reputation in international Buddhist 
circles.  The leader of the Shwekyin is always named vice 
chairman of the aforementioned sangha working committee. 
 
-- Nget Twin: The smallest of the three sects.  Nget Twin 
members have a religious and political profile close to that 
of the Thudamma sect, but are not involved in social 
activities. 
 
Young Man, There's a Place You Can Go 
 
¶5. (SBU) These days, Buddhism's political influence lies with 
the sangha and its associations.  Buddhism's original 
political arm, the Young Men's Buddhist Association (YMBA), 
founded in 1906, played a crucial role during the early fight 
for Burmese independence.  However, the organization is a 
shell of its former self.  The YMBA's current leader avows 
the group is apolitical, focusing now on promoting Buddhist 
education for children -- a campaign encouraged by the 
government -- and other humanitarian work.  The Ministry of 
Health, grasping around for local, independent NGOs to shore 
up an application to the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis, 
and Malaria (GFATM), drafted the YMBA to help provide 
HIV/AIDS education.  The YMBA will do this, by encouraging 
children to live clean, ethical lives according to Buddhist 
principles. 
 
Proverb: "A Monk's Greed is Immeasurable" 
 
¶6. (C) There is a long tradition in Burma of Buddhist monks 
leading opposition to unjust rulers.  Recognizing this, the 
military regime has displayed impressive stick and carrot 
work over the last 15 years to intimidate and co-opt the 
sangha's senior leadership and thus ensure the rank-and-file 
monks remain politically "correct."  However, the sangha is 
not an entirely neutralized political force.  Many senior 
monks, especially of the Shwekyin faction, try to avoid 
choosing sides.  Furthermore, the abbots' control of their 
acolytes, many of whom are not lifelong monks, may not be 
unquestioned.  We've heard reliable accounts of young 
novices, though sworn to obedience and humility, grumbling 
over the cash and prizes they see the government heaping upon 
their greedy leaders.  Such grumbling may continue following 
the November 6th decision of the sangha working committee, 
with quiet direction from the Ministry of Religious Affairs, 
to close monastic schools, and impose a curfew on remaining 
monks, to avoid further Muslim-Buddhist violence (reftel). 
Martinez