This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 004071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/01/2013 
TAGS: PREL KISL SOCI KU IZ
SUBJECT: LACK OF NAJAF SECURITY THREATENS SHIA SUPPORT 
 
REF: A. KUWAIT 1417 
     ¶B. KUWAIT 1665 
     ¶C. KUWAIT 2276 
     ¶D. KUWAIT 3619 
 
Classified By: CDA Frank C. Urbancic for reason 1.5 (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  Reacting to the death of Sayed Mohammed 
Baqer Al-Hakim, prominent Kuwaiti Shi'is have again (reftels) 
warned the Embassy that the absence of increased security for 
Shi,a religious leaders based in the city of Najaf is 
threatening coalition efforts in Iraq and turning the 
country's majority Shi'i population against the U.S.  End 
Summary. 
 
Security for Religious Leaders Paramount 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Members of the prominent Kuwait Shi'a Marafie family 
met with Poloffs on the evening of Sept 1 to relay their 
concerns and those of the Shi'a religious establishment in 
Najaf, that the continued lack of security for Shi'a clerics 
in the city is severely undermining coalition efforts in 
Iraq.  Abdul Ilah Marafie said that the office manager of 
Sayed Mohamed Said Hakim had recently asked him to pass a 
message to the USG that all religious leaders in Najaf are in 
danger in the current environment.  He said that Shi'a 
worldwide were now beginning to blame the U.S. for the 
instability in Iraq, and called on the coalition to provide 
security for Shi'ism,s Najaf-based leadership.  Iraqi 
Governing Council Member Abdulaziz Baqer Al-Hakim has now 
taken to referring to coalition forces as "invaders," the 
Marafies said. "If you don't support the Shia, you will lose 
many things," they added.  " A big percentage of the security 
of Iraq is the security of Najaf." 
 
Responsibility for Al-Hakim's Death 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Speculating as to who was behind the recent murder of 
Sayed Mohammed Baqer Al-Hakim, the Marafies said they were 
convinced that Saddam Hussein had worked with elements of 
Al-Qaeda to pull off the attack, especially after they heard 
Al-Jazeera's broadcast earlier that same day of a tape in 
which a voice believed to be Saddam Hussein's denied 
responsibility for the incident. "When Saddam denies 
something, you can be sure he is behind it," noted one of the 
Marafie brothers.  The brothers also stated they believed 
"Wahhabis" may be taking advantage of the situation in Iraq 
to further their goals. 
 
Bahr-Al Oloum and the GC 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Lamenting that Iraq's Governing Council (GC) Member 
Mohammed Bahr Al-Oloum had withdrawn from that body in the 
aftermath of the Al-Hakim murder, Abdul Ilah Marafie claimed 
that he personally had been the one who had persuaded a 
reluctant Bahr al-Oloum to join the GC in the first place 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: The well-connected Marafies want us to 
succeed in Iraq, but fear the Shi'a community could erupt 
uncontrollably if another major Shi'a cleric were to be 
assassinated. 
 
¶6. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
URBANCIC