This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T MONTREAL 000979 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR CA/VO/L/C and INR/IC and SA/INS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/25/2O13 
TAGS: PTER KVPR PINR
SUBJECT: TAMIL TIGERS FUND-RAISER IN MONTREAL 
 
Classified By: Bernadette Allen, Principal Officer; Reasons 
1.5 B and D 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Summary:  A Local Canadian Law Enforcement 
Source has informed Post that there will be a "Tamil 
Olympics" the week of 28 July 20O3 in Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.  Source reports that this event is a fund 
raiser for the Tamil Tigers Terrorist Organization (LTTE). 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  According to the reliable source the "Tamil 
Olympics" is a gathering of individuals of Sri Lankan 
decent who now live in Canada.  The gathering includes many 
activities including several sporting games, and attracts 
Sri Lankans from all over Canada.  According to Source at 
last year's "Olympics" individuals were prcssured into 
"donating" gold jewelry and cash.  Local Law Enforcement 
attempted to track the jewelry; however, according to 
Source the jewelry passed through many individuals and the 
trail was lost.  Local Law Enforcement believes that the 
money derived from the jewelry was funneled to the LTTE. 
Source also states that individuals were threatened with 
violence to give money to various charities that Law 
Enforcement believes funneled the money to the LTTE.  Local 
Law Enforcement was not able to make any arrests because 
the individuals involved in the extortion would not come 
forward to talk to Law Enforcement. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Source also stated that his branch of Local Law 
Enforcement was being pressured to "find something on the 
LTTE soon because the (Canadian) Government wants to put 
the LTTE on the (Canadian) list of Terrorist 
Organizations."  Source stated that Local Law Enforcement 
would have the "Olympics" under surveillance but added that 
they have had significant problems infiltrating the local 
Tamil groups in the past because they are a very tight- 
knit, homogeneous group. 
ALLEN