This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L LAGOS 001967 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2008 
TAGS: ECON ENRG EPET ETRD NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: SHELL AND POSSIBLY CHEVRON MAY RESUME 
PUMPING OIL IN NORTHERN DELTA SOON 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1379 
     ¶B. LAGOS 1745 
     ¶C. LAGOS 1940 
     ¶D. ABUJA NI 1594 
 
 
Classified By: RHINSON-JONES FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY. Shell Oil has been assessing its crude oil 
production facilities in the Delta swamps shut down by ethnic 
violence five months ago, and concludes some may again be 
operational by September 20, 2003.  Shell could pump as much 
as 40,000 to 50,000 additional barrels per day of crude oil 
from the region within two weeks.  Even though Chevron 
executives may dislike the idea, this development could press 
the company to follow suit soon.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Econoff spoke with Shell Oil's security manager based 
in Warri on September 15.  The security manager said Shell 
has been assessing well-heads, flow lines and pipelines in 
the Northern Delta which were shut down in March due to 
ethnic clashes.  The assessments indicate minimal damage was 
done to Shell facilities, he said, and it may be possible to 
bring some of them online by the end of the week.  Shell 
could be pumping as much as 40,000 to 50,000 barrels per day 
from the closed well-heads within two weeks, he also said. 
Approximately 140,000 barrels per day of Shell's production 
from the region remains closed as a result of the March 
violence.  (NOTE: Up to 300,000 barrels per day of crude 
developed by Shell, Chevron, and TotalfinaElf in the Northern 
Delta region are offline.)  Shell's security manager said the 
ramped-up military presence in the Delta is a significant 
factor in the company's decision to bring the closed 
production back online now.  (NOTE: He also confirmed that 
Shell is providing logistical assistance to the military 
deployed to the area in the form of food, staging areas and 
the use of non-military boats for troop and equipment 
movement (ref A)). 
 
 
¶3. (C) Chevron officials have insisted that the company will 
not return to its wells in the isolated riverine areas of the 
Delta State swamps until the GON effectively restores law and 
order there (ref B).  While a massive troop build-up in and 
around Warri has produced a tense peace (ref C), a Chevron 
spokesperson told Econoff in early September the company is 
unwilling to spend the millions of dollars needed to repair 
damage done to its facilities in the swamps during the March 
violence until the risk is significantly reduced. (NOTE: 
Either Chevron suffered more damage to its facilities or is 
more risk-averse than Shell, or both.) 
 
 
¶4. (C) COMMENT.  If this assessment of Shell's willingness to 
restart its Northern Swamp production proves accurate, 
Nigeria will soon take a welcome step in returning to full 
crude production.  Since March 2003, the GON has lost much 
oil revenue as a result of the crisis in the Delta. 
 
 
¶5. (C) COMMENT CONTINUED.  If Shell brings its production 
back online in the coming days, the GON will likely pressure 
Chevron to follow suit. Chevron executives may not be able to 
hold fast to their demand that the government demonstrate its 
ability to establish and maintain peace and order before the 
company restarts operations in the Warri swamplands.  The GON 
may interpret Shell's decision to return to the swamps as a 
signal that corporate sponsorship of the joint military 
deployment Operation Restore Hope is a successful security 
model (ref C, D).  This informal, off-the-record arrangement 
shifts the cost of the massive military presence required to 
provide security for oil workers and facilities largely to 
the companies.  Should Chevron find itself paying for 
security in the region anyway, it may feel economic pressure 
to resume production in the region sooner than later simply 
to recoup this outlay. END COMMENT. 
HINSON-JONES