This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 002039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DS FOR DS/IP/NEA/SA AND DS/DSS/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2013 
TAGS: ASEC CE PTER
SUBJECT: COLOMBO EAC DATED 11/24/03 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 324952 
     ¶B. B) STATE 325061 
     ¶C. C) STATE 325054 
 
Classified By: RSO Alex Moore - Reason: 1.5(G) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary - In response to information and guidance 
provided in Reftels, Embassy Colombo convened an EAC on 
11/24/03 to discuss the Embassy's current security posture 
and to develop a plan of action to address other potential 
American targets in Sri Lanka that could be perceived as 
"soft."  The EAC agreed the Embassy would continue its 
efforts to tighten its vehicle and visitor access procedures 
and pursue a more aggressive role in providing security 
assistance to schools, businesses, and other potential soft 
targets representing American interests.  It was also agreed 
that RSO would seek permission to train and equip three 
members of the Embassy's Local Guard Force to serve as 
Bodyguards for the AMB when the situation is dictated by 
threat.  Details follow. 
 
¶2.  (C) On 11/24/03, Embassy Colombo convened an EAC to 
discuss information and guidance provided in Reftels.  The 
EAC was chaired by AMB and attended by DCM, RSO, ARSO, POL, 
ECON, DAO, CLO, and PD.  AMB opened the meeting with an 
overview of recent terrorist events in the world and reviewed 
the threat environment in Sri Lanka.  The EAC determined that 
at present, there is no specific information regarding 
terrorist threats to Americans or American interests in Sri 
Lanka.  The AMB then transitioned the meeting toward a 
discussion of recent recommendations proposed by RSO to 
tighten vehicle and visitor access procedures at the Chancery 
and American Center, which houses AID and PD.  (Visitor 
parking and delivery vehicle procedures were two areas 
identified by the IG in October as being out of compliance 
with the standards for high threat posts.  The IG also 
confirmed that the degraded state of the windows in the Guard 
Booth at the American Center were a serious security 
liability.  Post requests for funding to resolve this 
liability will reiterated septel.) 
 
¶3.  (C) The EAC then shifted its attention to the security of 
schools attended by American dependents in Colombo.  Although 
there is no American school in Colombo, most Embassy 
dependents attend the Overseas School of Colombo (OSC). 
Three Embassy families send their children to the British and 
French Schools respectively.  RSO advised that OSC is 
currently in Phase One of the Office of Overseas Schools 
grant program to fund a radio base station, a Public Address 
system, and window film for the school.  RSO advised that he 
would move toward implementing Phase Two of the program, 
which seeks to provide moderate physical security 
enhancements to schools.  AMB instructed the RSO to contact 
the British and French Schools and offer advice and 
recommendations to their security programs as well. 
 
¶4.  (C) The EAC discussed the American business community as 
a potential soft target for terrorists and the point was made 
that the DS Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC) program 
intends to visit post in January for the purpose of 
developing an OSAC in Sri Lanka.  Until OSAC is established, 
however, AMB requested that ECON provide the local American 
Chamber of Commerce basic security information using 
unclassified language contained in Reftels.  (On a side 
 
SIPDIS 
meeting with ECON, RSO agreed to make a security presentation 
to AMCHAM in early December.) 
 
¶5.  (C) Finally, the EAC endorsed RSO's recommendation to 
seek authorization from DS to train and equip three qualified 
Local Guard Force members as armed Ambassadorial Bodyguards 
for when the  situation is dictated by a high threat.  The 
Ambassador emphasized that it would only be under exceptional 
circumstances that his bodyguards would be armed, but that it 
was important to have the necessary authorization, training 
and equipment in place. (A cable will be forthcoming seeking 
DS approval for RSO's plan of action for this initiative.) 
 
LUNSTEAD