This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 SANAA 000516 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, OPS FOR IRAQ TASK FORCE, 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/18/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER AADP CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING MARCH 18;  UPDATE ON MARIB 
INCIDENT 
 
REF: A. SANAA 511 
     ¶B. SANAA 398 
     ¶C. SANAA 489 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened an 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meeting on March 18 to 
assess threat information in light of the shooting incident 
at the Hunt Oil facility in Marib (ref a) and the Iraq 
contingency.  An uncorroborated source from an accounting 
firm that works with Hunt and Nabors reported to RSO that the 
shooter was a disgruntled employee who had been fired and who 
was not supposed to be allowed on the oil complex.  EAC 
members decided to go to the MoveSafe stance immediately as a 
precaution, which means that employees must limit their 
travel and move in armored vehicles from residence to Embassy 
(ref b).  Key offices and personnel represented at the 
meeting included: AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, 
ORCA, OMC, SOC YEMEN, RMO, FPD, FBI and YALI (Yemen American 
Language Institute).  End summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Update on Shootings in Marib 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Ambassador spoke by telephone with Ray Hunt, Hunt 
Oil President (in the U.S.), and assured him of the Embassy's 
assistance with the disposition of the Amcit Ron Horsch's 
body and the injured Canadian victim.  RMO spoke to the 
director of the Yemen-German Hospital where the injured 
Canadian is undergoing surgery at 1830 local time.  He was 
shot twice in the area of the liver but progress is 
reportedly positive.  RMO will remain in close contact with 
hospital authorities to monitor his condition and offer 
assistance as needed.  Hunt headquarters is contacting family 
members of the victims.  CONS is coordinating closely with 
Hunt to provide services as necessary. 
 
¶3.  (S)  Post cannot yet determine the motive of the killer. 
However, a source from an accounting firm co-located near 
Hunt oil and Nabors in Marib reported to RSO that the killer, 
Naji Ahmed al-Kumayn, was a disgruntled former employee, 
recently fired, who was not supposed to be at the oil 
complex.  This source reported differing information from 
that received from Hunt regarding the weapon used in this 
incident, stating that it was an AK-47 and not a pistol. 
FBI, FPD (acting as a force multiplier for RSO) and security 
personnel are traveling to Marib to assist in the 
investigation.  Post expects further investigative details by 
the morning of March 19.   (Comment:  Post urges caution in 
reaching any conclusion on killer's motivation pending 
results of investigation.) 
 
¶4.  (C)  Post has received many calls from media outlets 
asking for information.  A press statement was released after 
clearance and answers to follow-up questions have been 
prepared.  See paragraph 15 for text of press statement. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Iraq Contingency and Current Threat Information 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  Ambassador said that in light of President Bush's 
speech, the change to StandFast would probably occur by 
Thursday, March 20 unless circumstances warrant otherwise, 
which will be discussed in another EAC meeting on March 19. 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  ORCA briefed on current threat information.  Some 
reporting was received corroborating the possibility of 
random terrorist attacks unaffiliated to al-Qaeda or Iraqi 
elements.  It was noted that such "lone wolf" terrorists, 
acting alone or with small groups, could take advantage of 
the Yemeni security forces possibly being stretched thin in 
an Iraq contingency responding to increased demonstrations. 
ORCA said that "lone wolf" terrorists do not have the time or 
resources to plan attacks and would look for targets of 
opportunity.  Changing routes and times and avoiding known 
places where Americans congregate or popular intersections is 
key to staying safe. 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  In light of the Marib incident of an employee 
being the killer, security at the Embassy regarding FSN 
access was discussed.  FSNs are screened through metal 
detectors both at the entrance gate and at Post One.  EAC 
members were not aware of any FSNs who might be angry at the 
Embassy.  The YALI Director stated that he would immediately 
institute similar entry screening for YALI staff of all 
nationalities. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
No Immediate Request for Authorized Departure 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Ambassador asked EAC members to consider seriously 
whether Post should recommend a change to authorized 
departure status.  There was no support for a move to 
authorized departure at this time.  It was decided that the 
EAC would discuss the matter further after more information 
is known about the Marib incident.  EAC members discussed a 
number of other factors, including: 
 
-- surveying all Amcit staff to again ascertain their opinion 
and whether non-essential employees and family members would 
plan to leave; 
 
-- determining what was meant by a comment made by the head 
of airport security to FPD that if it was up to him he would 
close the airport starting March 19; 
 
-- examining the likelihood of incidents like Marib and Jibla 
happening in Sanaa to harder targets; 
 
-- continuing to examine tripwires; 
 
-- assessing reaction to the start of an Iraq war. 
 
---------------- 
MoveSafe Posture 
---------------- 
 
¶9.  (S/NF)  After discussing the Marib incident, the Iraq 
contingency and other threat information, EAC members decided 
to go to a MoveSafe stance effective immediately after 
weighing the pros and cons of such a move.  During MoveSafe, 
employees are directed to minimize travel on the streets of 
Sanaa and required to perform essential travel in armored 
vehicles only (ref b).  Information on MoveSafe status was 
disseminated by radio, telephone and by section heads to 
those still at the Embassy. 
 
--------------- 
Warden Messages 
--------------- 
 
¶10.  (U)  RSO reported that the Ministry of Interior 
recommended that Americans avoid Bab al-Yemen and other 
tourist areas for the time being in light of the possible 
war.  EAC decided to issue an immediate Warden Message 
apprising Amcits of the Marib incident and including this 
recommendation to avoid known areas where Americans 
congregate. 
 
------------------------------ 
Other Security Issues/Measures 
------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (S)  The area where all vehicles undergo bomb checks in 
front of the embassy was discussed as a possible easy target. 
 RSO will move vehicles to block sightlines to that area and 
in the long term is looking into moving the sight off the 
main road.  In addition, section heads were encouraged to 
ensure that employees did alter their time of arrival to 
avoid congestion and ensure they were changing times and 
routes to a degree sufficient to frustrate any surveillance 
attempt. 
 
¶11.  (S)  RSO continued follow-up meetings regarding Sheraton 
security to ensure proper coordination between the multiple 
layers of security present at the hotel, including PSO, MOI, 
hotel guards and group four (ref c). 
¶12.  (C)  Embassy-affiliated Yemen-American Language School 
(YALI) was discussed.  It was recommended that they screen 
all employees.  As recommended to all Amcits, YALI plans to 
lie low when the Iraq war begins and assess the situation 
before returning to regular operations. 
 
¶13.  (C)  The National Democratic Institute decided to move 
their Amcit and Canadian trainers into Sanaa and move the 
director to a hotel from her well-known house.  NDI is now 
considering having all of its temporary expats leave Yemen in 
light of the Marib incident. 
 
¶14.  (C)  The March 15 demonstrations were discussed.  RSO 
reported that the MOI gave him conflicting information from 
that reported by the United Nations security director 
regarding how the demonstration near the UN complex in Sanaa 
was dispersed.  The UN representative reported that shots 
were fired in the air by security forces after several unruly 
youths attempted to climb a vehicle with a machine gun mount. 
 No injuries occurred.  The MOI reported, however, that shots 
were fired in the air after stone throwers threatened to get 
out of hand, and denied that anyone attempted to get onto a 
military vehicle.  DAO said that a reliable source confirmed 
press reports that demonstrations in Saada on the same day 
got out of control and several people were killed. 
 
¶15.  (U)  Text of Press Statement: 
 
The American Embassy has learned of the shooting of four 
employees of Hunt Oil in Marib, Yemen. 
 
One American citizen, a Yemeni and a Canadian were killed; 
another Canadian wounded. 
 
We condemn this violence and call on the Yemeni government to 
investigate it fully. 
 
We cannot release further information pending notification of 
family. 
 
The Embassy will assist in dealing with the injured and 
deceased. 
 
American law enforcement personnel will assist the Yemeni 
government in investigating this case. 
HULL