This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 001568 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TRA, WHA/CAN, NEA, AND S/CT 
PASS TSA FOR SUSAN WILLIAMS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/04/2012 
TAGS: ASEC EAIR PTER PINR CA LE
SUBJECT: NO AIR CANADA FLIGHTS TO BEIRUT NOW 
 
 
¶1. Classified by Economic Minister Counselor Michael 
Gallagher for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Transport Canada's Director of Security Jim Marriott 
confirmed that the Canadian Transportation Agency, the 
licensing arm of the Ministry, has suspended the license that 
had been issued in March to Air Canada for flights from 
Montreal to Beirut.  The reason for the suspension is 
"national security."  Marriott said this was a "victory" for 
those concerned about aviation security. Marriott added that 
Canada will be watching very closely for signs of any 
rapproachment between the U.S. and Lebanon (and Syria); in 
particular, whether the USG changes its policy regarding 
flights by U.S. carriers into Beirut. 
 
¶2. (C) Bruce Levy of the Department of Foreign Affairs and 
International Trade (DFAIT) told us Transport Canada will 
certainly be asked: 1. what has changed since the license was 
issued in March? and, 2. what was the influence of the United 
States on this decision?  Levy said the first question will 
be very difficult to answer.  As for the second, Levy said he 
had recommended that, if asked, Transport Candada acknowledge 
that the USG had conveyed its views, but that the Canadian 
goverment made the decision independently.  Levy added that 
Air Canada has sold thousands of tickets for the Beirut 
flights already, primarily to Canada's large Lebanese 
community, so the decision to suspend the license for the 
flights will not be greeted with hosannas by everyone - 
especially as Air Canada is now in bankruptcy and needs 
revenue. 
 
¶3. (C) Air Canada representatives had no comment on the issue 
other than to say they expect to release a press announcement 
today. 
 
¶4. (C). Comment:  While we let Canada know our views on this 
issue very clearly at several levels, our approach has always 
been private and behind the scenes.  We strongly recommend 
that the Department and other agencies have minimal public 
comment on this.  Given Canadian sensitivities about U.S. 
pressure, undue focus on the U.S. role could complicate our 
future security efforts. End Comment. 
CELLUCCI