This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 000540 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2013 
TAGS: MOPS PREL AF CA ISAF
SUBJECT: CANADA SEARCHING FOR PARTNERS FOR ISAF IV AND V 
 
REF: OTTAWA 435 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Since Defense Minister McCallum's February 12 
announcement that Canada would contribute a battalion and 
brigade headquarters to ISAF IV and V (reftel), the GoC has 
been busy seeking potential partners.  The GoC has stressed 
that it does not have the resources to lead ISAF alone, and 
it hopes to get confirmation in the next few weeks that 
Germany will help lead ISAF IV.  For ISAF V, Canada is 
looking at either Italy or Spain.  McCallum has spoken with 
Italian Defense Minister Martino, and will be lobbying him 
again during a June visit to Ottawa.  Canadian officials tell 
us that while Spain's Parliament had decided not to 
participate, during the Munich meetings German Defense 
Minister Struck got his Spanish counterpart Trillo to agree 
to take another look. 
 
¶2. (C) Canada wants quickly to begin negotiations on a 
Memorandum of Understanding with the U.S. military on support 
for this mission, and is pushing for NATO support as well. 
McCallum has said NATO participation is needed to help ensure 
ISAF continuity.  Meanwhile, there continue to be misgivings 
in the Canadian Forces about their ISAF contribution because 
of its size and duration.  MGEN Cam Ross, Department of 
National Defense (DND) Director General for International 
Security Policy, resigned (effective in June) after the ISAF 
announcement to protest what he saw as an over-commitment of 
Canadian troops.  Ironically, Ross is leading a DND team that 
is visiting Italy, Spain, and possibly Germany and NATO this 
week to discuss ISAF force structure.  While Canada needs 
another major partner for ISAF IV and V, DND also wants to 
ensure that it has an appropriate tactical and leadership 
role. 
 
¶3. (C) To complement Canada's military contribution to ISAF, 
Foreign Affairs (DFAIT) is pushing to open a diplomatic 
mission in Kabul.  Cabinet has approved the concept of such a 
mission, but DFAIT is now in a battle with the Treasury Board 
over funding.  DFAIT currently covers Afghanistan from its 
Embassy in Islamabad. 
 
¶4. (C) COMMENT: Critics of the GoC's ISAF commitment point to 
the fact that Canada was unable to replace a battalion that 
it pulled out of Afghanistan (where it was part of Operation 
Enduring Freedom) after a 6-month stint last year.  While DND 
did better than expected in the GoC budget announced earlier 
this month - an increase of 7%, or $530 million, plus $215 
million additional for contingency operations - a 12-month 
commitment to ISAF will be a major drain on the Canadian 
Forces.  Canada will need all the help it can get from Allies 
and, ideally, from NATO itself. 
CELLUCCI