This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KJUS GT
SUBJECT: INCREASED POLICE PROTECTION FOR ANTHROPOLOGISTS, 
ENVIRONMENTALISTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1548 
 
Classified By: POLOFF Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In response to increased threats targeting 
forensic anthropologists conducting exhumations, Ambassador 
Hamilton met with Minister of Interior Reyes Calderon on June 
27 to press for an enhanced GOG response.  Reyes Calderon 
said he had already given orders in the case of the 
anthropologists working in the Rabinal area after 
election-related violence there (reftel) and volunteered that 
he had detailed protection to CONAP, Guatemala's 
environmental protection agency, after police officers were 
caught in the Peten stealing tropical hardwoods.  Until the 
GOG aggressively pursues those making the threats, however, 
there will always be more individuals threatened than there 
is protection available for them.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) In a June 27 meeting, the Ambassador informed Minister 
of Interior Jose Reyes Calderon of the increasing threats 
against forensic anthropologists conducting exhumations in 
Rabinal, Baja Verapaz.  The Ambassador told Reyes Calderon 
about a recent threat against Fredy Peccerelli, head of the 
anthropologist team, which was communicated to the boyfriend 
of Peccerelli's sister and pointed out that although 
Peccerelli and his immediate family have protection, the 
boyfriend did not and would be the next to "suffer" if the 
exhumations continue.  Reyes Calderon assured the Ambassador 
that his Ministry took these threats very seriously, but said 
the Ministry could not provide round-the-clock protection to 
everyone related to anyone involved in the exhumations.  He 
added that due to increased tensions in Rabinal, he had 
already given orders to find additional resources to devote 
to protecting the anthropologists. 
 
¶3. (C) Reyes Calderon also told the Ambassador that in 
response to concerns from CONAP, he had ordered protection 
for the CONAP warehouse in the Peten where evidence against 
two police officers was being stored after they were arrested 
transporting stolen tropical hardwood in a police vehicle. 
Reyes Calderon said he had spoken with CONAP Director, a 
personal friend, and concluded that the safety of the 
evidence and the CONAP personnel in Peten were at risk. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: Reyes Calderon admitted that criminal 
elements who are determined to intimidate those who stand in 
their way can easily identify victims that fall outside the 
limited ability of the police to provide protection. 
Although he has been responsive in directing police 
protection toward threats we identify, Reyes Calderon has 
been less successful in investigating those who make the 
threats.  These new cases illustrate the need for CICIACS or 
a similar outside investigative entity that can do more than 
redirect protective resources which are spread increasingly 
thin. 
LINDWALL