This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002734 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AC/CB, NP/CBM, VC/CCB, L/ACV, IO/S 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISP 
JOINT STAFF FOR DD PMA-A FOR WTC 
COMMERCE FOR BIS (GOLDMAN) 
NSC FOR CHUPA 
WINPAC FOR LIEPMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL CWC
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC): FIRST MEETING 
OF THE FOURTH SECURITY AUDIT TEAM 
 
¶1.  This is CWC-114-03. 
 
¶2.  The OPCW Technical Secretariat (TS) convened a 16-17 
October 2003 meeting of the fourth Security Audit Team 
(SAT-IV) in The Hague, The Netherlands.  SAT-IV is comprised 
of representatives from Japan, France, The Netherlands, and 
the U.S.  Yonosuke Harada of Japan, who chaired SAT-III, 
agreed to chair SAT-IV.  The meeting was called at short 
notice, ostensibly to finalize an audit charter, mandate, and 
timetable.  The team remains concerned that the TS may have 
called the meeting in order to satisfy an Executive Council 
requirement that it do so before the 20-24 October 2003 
Conference of State Parties.  The team was disappointed by 
the TS' reluctance to discuss the mechanics of the upcoming 
audit and was concerned about the TS claim that it will not 
have the resources to support a security audit before October 
¶2004. 
 
¶3.  OPCW Director General (DG) Rogelio Pfirter personally 
welcomed the SAT-IV team on 17 October 2003, and agreed in 
theory that the TS needs a baseline review of its Information 
Technology (IT) infrastructure and operating environment. 
The DG asked the team not to overwhelm his staff, and his 
comments may have inadvertently postponed further 
SAT-IV-related activities until fall 2004.  The TS and SAT-IV 
began work on a draft charter, mandate, and mutually agreed 
timetable for future security audit activities.  The team 
will continue its joint drafting effort with the TS via 
e-mail in the hope that once agreed, the team can schedule a 
follow-on face-to-face meeting with TS personnel later this 
calendar year.  (Comment:  As of 28 October 2003, the SAT-IV 
had completed work on its drafts.) 
 
¶4.  The French and Japanese auditors both noted that TS 
attitudes regarding IT security and auditing remain somewhat 
cavalier and worrisome.  In particular, the team was told by 
Robert Simpson, Office of Confidentiality and Security (OCS), 
that its current emphasis had shifted from IT to physical 
security concerns.  Comments by Jan Engles (Information 
Security Systems), Robert Simpson (OCS), and Gregory Linden 
(Information Support Branch) provided more questions than 
answers regarding TS plans for deployment of its verification 
database, electronic data exchange, and handling of 
confidential data. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶5.  OCS staff indicated that the TS' classified computer 
network, known as the secure critical network (SCN), had been 
certified to process confidential data by an earlier audit 
team.  SAT-IV viewed this as a misperception: the SCN has 
never been formally evaluated for this specific role; what 
had been certified was the electronic document management 
system.  Previous security audit teams have been unable to 
evaluate the efficacy of the TS IT security lock-downs 
because they have not been allowed to inspect the TS' 
protocol for securing the declaration data submitted by State 
Parties or the derivative data generated by the TS from the 
declarations.  The audit team also remains concerned that the 
TS is proposing to transfer declarations scrubbed of 
 
SIPDIS 
sensitive material from the SCN to States Parties using 
electronic data written on CD-ROMs. 
 
¶6.  Finally, an earlier audit team recommended that the TS 
consolidate its stand-alone databases onto the SCN until the 
TS was ready to implement its full relational database. 
 
SIPDIS 
According to the TS, the interim system is based on Microsoft 
Access, which has a number of security deficiencies.  Recent 
audit teams have not been able to assess the level of 
security used, although the audit team asked that the TS 
provide it with database logs upon completion of the 
migration. 
 
¶7.  SAT-IV assesses that a number of IT issues require a 
candid and open dialogue and has sought to establish a 
collegial working relationship with the TS.  The team is 
concerned that the continued TS reluctance to share 
information with the team may be indicative of a more 
systemic problem within the staff levels at the TS. 
SOBEL