This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 004959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT:  KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, OCTOBER 17-26: IRAQ: MADRID 
DONORS CONFERENCE; WAR ON TERROR; OIC SUMMIT IN KUALA 
LUMPUR; TURKISH TROOP DEPLOYMENT; US TREASURY VISIT TO 
KUWAIT; ISLAMIC CHARITIES; WOMEN'S RIGHTS 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: Some MPs oppose Kuwait's support of Iraqi 
reconstruction, saying money should not be given to the 
"enemy occupier." A liberal commentator writes that 
Islamists reject the aid because they are opposed to 
"liberal concepts." Another comments on the memo by 
Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld made public this week, saying 
 
SIPDIS 
it "demonstrates the failure of the American policy." 
 
Malaysian Prime Minister Mahatir's comments at the OIC 
Summit last week drew mixed responses, being described by 
commentators as "worthy of coming from an Al-Qaeda 
spokesman," and as "courageous and factual." A conservative 
commentator believes "the lack of any Western response" to 
comments by Deputy Undersecretary of Defense Lt. Gen. 
William Boykin is evidence of a "Western double-standard." 
Another conservative describes Western civilization as 
"racist and obsessed with power." 
 
A recent visit to Kuwait by a Treasury Department delegation 
prompts one writer to proclaim, "we will make charitable 
donations whether America likes it or not." Newspapers 
report this week the loosening of a ban on money transfers 
by Islamic charities. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  News Stories: At the Madrid donors conference, Kuwait 
announced a 1.5-billion-dollar aid package to Iraq, one 
billion of which has already been disbursed. Al-Anba reports 
that four MPs strongly rejected donating money "to an enemy 
who occupied our country" and argued that Kuwaitis should 
have priority to this money. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam and Al-Qabas report on their October 21 front 
pages that Minister of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs, Dr. 
Abdullah Al-Matooq, declared support for women's political 
rights with the condition that women who run for office be 
veiled, do not wear make-up, do not travel without a male 
family companion, and do not mix with men. He added that 
Islamists will be the greatest winner if women are granted 
political rights. 
 
All newspapers report on October 25 that the Ministry of 
Social Affairs and Labor loosened a ban on the transfer of 
charity funds abroad, authorizing five charities to send 
money abroad, but only through the Central Bank. 
 
Al-Qabas and Al-Rai Al-Aam newspapers reported on October 25 
that the Revival of Islamic Heritage Society and the Islamic 
Social Reform Society denounced Osama bin Laden's threats 
against Kuwait. 
 
All newspapers report that Yemeni anti-terrorism authorities 
released a Kuwaiti Islamic preacher, Jaber Al-Jalahma, 
detained at Sanaa airport. Al-Jalahma is reportedly known 
for his extremist ideas and has been detained previously by 
Kuwaiti authorities. 
 
All newspapers report that DNA tests have identified the 
remains of 11 more Kuwaiti POWs killed by the ousted Iraqi 
regime. 
 
All newspapers report that Kuwaiti medical doctor, Dr. Ahmed 
Al-Shatti, was awarded "Man of the Year" prize at the World 
Awards ceremony in Hamburg for his treatment of the young 
Iraqi Ali Abbas who lost both arms and his parents during 
the war in Iraq. 
 
Al-Watan reported that the Kuwaiti security officials 
apprehended a Syrian interpreter working for the US military 
for attempting to smuggle whiskey and gin from Iraq into 
Kuwait. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Political Islam and Iraq" 
Director of Kuwait University's Center for Future and 
Strategic Studies, Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent 
Al-Seyassah (10/26): "[A number of MPs] object to the 
government's decision to donate to Iraq [because they] 
reject the American presence in Iraq and the region. The 
political Islamists such as the Salafis and the Muslim 
Brotherhood believe that the American presence in the region 
may push Arab and Islamic governments to adopt democracy and 
freedom of expression. and such liberal concepts are 
rejected by these groups. We thank the Kuwaiti government 
for its courageous stance. " 
 
¶4.  "Good Morning, Mr. Secretary" 
Professor of Political Science Department at Kuwait 
University, Dr. Ibrahim Al-Hadban wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (10/25):  "The memo sent by the US Secretary of 
Defense Rumsfeld to his senior officers clearly demonstrates 
the failure of the American policy adopted by President Bush 
on what is known as war on terrorism. This memo represents 
an American awakening after the prolonged sleep of the 
American administration and reflects a misunderstanding of 
the nature of the Arab and Islamic worlds. However, it is 
obvious that the awakening of the Secretary was only 
momentary, for he was able to define the problem but failed 
to find a solution." 
 
¶5. "The Worst of the OIC Summit" 
Liberal Lawyer Hassan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(10/19):  "The low point of the [Organization of Islamic 
Conferences or OIC] summit was the statement made the 
Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir. We would have imagined 
such a statement coming from a terrorist like Ayman Al- 
Thahawry of Al-Qaeda. Such statements demonstrate to the 
world that Islam and Muslim leaders are anti-Semitic and 
therefore grant the right-wing extremists in Israel the 
ability to act freely." 
 
¶6.  "Running the World by Power-of-Attorney" 
Former MP and conservative Shiite Dr. Abdul-Mohsen Yousef 
Jamal wrote in independent Al-Qabas (10/22):  "[US State 
Department spokesman Richard Boucher] declared that Prime 
Minister Mahathir's statements were insulting. In return, we 
have not heard any of these Westerners objecting to 
statements made by Deputy Undersecretary of Defense Lt. Gen. 
William Boykin. We hope that the Western-Islamic dialogue 
can be conducted without threats and ridicule of one's 
religion. We also hope that everyone be allowed to criticize 
Zionist terrorism and that [Zionists] not be granted power- 
of-attorney to run the world and destroy it, especially 
since they are known for corruption, world destruction, and 
inciting wars." 
 
¶7.  "Saving Iraq" 
Liberal Chairman of the Political Science Department at 
Kuwait University, Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent 
Al-Seyassah (10/19): "Despite the fact that six months have 
passed since the liberation of Iraq, the situation is still 
unstable due to US mismanagement there. For instance, the 
American decision to allow Turkish forces to enter Iraq as a 
peace force is clear proof that the US administration knows 
nothing about the history of Iraq." 
 
¶8.  "We Will Contribute Despite America" 
Dr. Khalid Al-Qhass wrote in independent Al-Watan (10/17): 
"We will contribute [money] to help the needy and widows and 
in building Islamic centers whether America likes it or not. 
We don't care if the American Treasury [Department] 
delegation objects to our contributions or not. We make 
contributions to suppress terrorism not to nourish it. We 
will contribute to prove to ourselves that we have freedom, 
dignity and the ability to make our own decisions without 
the need to adhere to the nonsense of the American 
administration." 
 
¶9.  "It is Over" 
Amena Al-Musawi wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (10/24): 
"The Zionist attack against Syria, the US-Zionist campaign 
against Iran under the pretext of its involvement in nuclear 
program and the green light granted to Israel by President 
Bush is a scenario written by Israel and implemented by 
American-Zionists in the American Administration. [W]hat is 
a real surprise is that there are people who still believe 
that the US came to this region to grant us the dream of 
democracy." 
 
¶10. "Does Islam Have a Civilizing Project?" 
Former MP and President of the Gulf Institute for Future and 
Studies Strategic, Islamist Ismail Al-Shatti, wrote in 
independent Al-Watan (10/26): "Conflict has always been the 
basis of relationships in the West, and life is based on a 
power struggle. Such a perspective has resulted in a racist 
culture, biased towards certain races at the expense of 
others, and obsessed with possessing power. This culture has 
ended up with a capitalist system that worships freedom as 
long as it guarantees its progress at the expense of 
justice. Since creation, history has never witnessed a 
civilization that has threatened life with extermination and 
destruction as Western civilization has done, and Man has 
never seen such a racist and arrogant leadership lead the 
world towards its downfall with such hysterical speed. The 
Islamic project cannot keep up with the physical and 
information achievements of Western civilization. It can, 
however, present a new perspective, one that redeems the 
purity [of Man] contaminated by the Western civilization 
using weapons of mass destruction." 
 
 
JONES