This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101009Z Nov 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 002225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/S FOR S. DELISI, M. RAYNOR 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER, TEITELBAUM 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/07/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID ZI MDC
SUBJECT: MDC SECRETARY GENERAL ON CARROTS AND STICKS 
 
REF: (A) HARARE 1977 (B) HARARE 1971 (C) HARARE 1185 
 
     (D) HARARE 1130 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Win Dayton under Section 1.5(b)(d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY.  MDC Secretary General Welshman Ncube on 
November 6 told poloff that he intended during his planned 
visit to Washington next week to urge the USG to be more 
vocal in its criticism of the GOZ.  At the same time, he 
concluded that the time had come for a more explicit 
elaboration by the USG of future assistance, conditioned on 
political progress, as a means to induce greater seriousness 
by the ruling party.  Ncube reported that the MDC's economic 
platform, dubbed RESTART, was being revised with particular 
attention to land reform details that might offer common 
policy ground with the ruling party.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) Ncube said that his planned visit with MDC National 
Coordinator Isaac Maphosa to Washington November 12 was at 
the behest of MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai.  Their 
principal objective was to brief USG officials on the 
increasingly difficult operating environment faced by the 
MDC, and to stimulate discussion of where collaborative 
efforts should go in light of the ruling party's non-movement 
on talks.  For his part, he thought it was time to review 
what he termed the "quieter" approach adopted by the USG 
since President Bush's visit to South Africa in July.  Ncube 
reiterated that President Mbeki's efforts had been wholly 
unsuccessful in moving Mugabe and were unlikely to succeed 
without ramped up international pressure.  In particular, he 
asserted that a more vocal effort by the USG would help 
fortify the confidence of SADC players who were most likely 
to influence the ruling party's posture.  Conversely, the 
U.K. should keep as low profile as possible, as any public 
British actions tended to play into Mugabe's posturing with 
SADC. 
 
¶3.  (C) Referencing departing Assistant Secretary 
Kansteiner's widely reported comments about the potential 
utility of reviewing carrots and sticks vis-a-vis the GOZ, 
Ncube expressed interest in exploring potential additional 
sticks, although he had none to suggest beyond more forceful 
diplomacy.  As for carrots, he recognized the potential 
utility of an articulation by the USG of what kinds of 
assistance could be advanced upon the achievement of 
political progress as a means to induce movement by the 
ruling party toward talks.  Areas for potential assistance 
and appropriate indices of political progress would have to 
be explored.  The MDC was working on a policy paper that 
would give greater definition the party's views on carrots, 
sticks, and foreign policy generally; Ncube said he hoped to 
see a draft before he departed for the Washington but the 
product was not due to be finalized until later this month, 
at the earliest. 
 
¶4.  (C) Ncube reported that the party's economic policy 
paper, dubbed "RESTART", had been sent back to the drawing 
boards but was still scheduled for release in late December. 
Party leaders had agreed that many sections required greater 
specificity, especially the segment on land reform.  In 
particular, a tenure system needed to be defined that would 
establish predictable, reliable, and marketable property 
rights in such a way that would restore the agricultural 
sector's productivity.  Echoing characterizations by 
colleagues (ref B), Ncube said that there could be no return 
to status quo ante and recognized that the government's 
redistrubution was a fait accompli from which any new 
government would have to work.  He predicted that RESTART's 
system for land use and property rights would contain 
elements that would converge with the ruling party's 
objective to make existing land reform productive. 
 
¶5.  (C) COMMENT: As the second leading figure in the MDC, 
Ncube speaks with authority for the party and we recommend 
that he be received at a high level.  It is the first time 
since the indictment of Tsvangirai and Ncube on fabricated 
treason charges prior to the March 2002 presidential 
elections that a senior MDC official has been free to visit 
the United States.  The MDC has evidenced some insecurity 
over our engagement with Mbeki on Zimbabwe and more 
"balanced" public comments on the regime (e.g., qualified 
recognition of progress in August municipal elections); the 
visitors are hoping for a strong show of support from 
Washington interlocutors with which to impress regional 
players, domestic constituents, and the ruling party. 
Ncube's conclusion about conditioned carrots coincides with 
repeated calls from the bishops (ref A).  Some explicit 
articulation of potential USG support, along the lines set 
out in the Zimbabwe Democracy and Economic Recovery Act and 
contingent on progress on the polical front, might strengthen 
the MDC's hand here and stimulate constructive deliberation 
within the ruling party.  Drawing from the discussion of 
options set out in refs C and D, we will explore potential 
measures in that regard via septel. 
SULLIVAN