This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 000037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/05/2013 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PREL ADCO ADPM YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: YEMEN FOREIGN MINISTER ON COUNTER-TERRORISM, 
SCUDS, POUCHES AND PROGRAMS 
 
REF: A. SANAA 3853 
     ¶B. SANAA 4024 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (S)  Summary:  The Ambassador met with Foreign Minister 
Qirby on January 5 at the MFA to follow-up on the SCUDS and 
pouch issues and to discuss counter-terrorism cooperation and 
upcoming USG programs.  Also present were MFA advisor 
al-Iryani, A/DCM and A/PolEcon Chief (notetaker). 
 
¶2.  (S)  The Ambassador expressed appreciation for the ROYG's 
practical and political response to the tragedy in Jibla last 
week, including the condolences received and the ROYG's 
efforts to galvanize public opinion to counter terror. 
Recent ROYG efforts include a government report to 
parliament, an unusual cabinet meeting chaired by Saleh after 
the Jibla incident and a meeting of Islamic scholars (ulema) 
to denounce terror (septel).  The FM agreed that mobilizing 
public opinion was very important, noting that the ROYG 
cannot fight terrorism without popular support and a 
comprehensive approach that includes economic development and 
educational reform.  Qirby said that the U.S.-ROYG 
relationship should be expanded.  The Ambassador agreed with 
the notion of a comprehensive approach and mentioned several 
ongoing and future initiatives that the USG is undertaking in 
development, including the hospital in Marib, expanded work 
in Beihan and al-Jowf and the return of USAID. 
 
¶3.  (S)  The Ambassador reported to Qirby continuing acute 
interest in Washington in finalizing understanding on North 
Korean-Yemeni arms deals.  Given his role in managing the 
crisis, the Secretary was interested in a clear understanding 
that would avoid any future problem.  Ambassador then pressed 
for the ROYG's response letter in the exchange of letters to 
close the loop on the SCUDs issue (ref b).  Qirby said that 
President Saleh instructed him to facilitate a meeting for 
the Ambassador with the Minister of Defense to get accurate 
details on any remaining shipments of parts and to formulate 
the ROYG's response letter.  Ambassador said we would hold 
that meeting soonest. 
 
¶4.  (S)  Qirby agreed to study a more detailed Embassy 
request to facilitate diplomatic pouches, including "belly 
loads" (ref A). 
 
¶5.  (S)  The Ambassador briefed the FM on the special IV 
program for presidential and MFA protocol officers and on the 
NESA seminar being organized to assist the ROYG in developing 
a national military strategy.  Qirby expressed appreciation 
for both initiatives. 
 
¶6.  (S)  Qirby brought up the notion of developing mechanisms 
for dialogue and said he was developing a plan to establish 
working teams.  The Ambassador noted a possible visit from 
A/S Burns and/or Qirby's next visit to Washington as good 
starting points. 
 
¶7.  (S)  Comment:  Qirby's promotion of a meeting with the 
MOD may indicate he wants an authoritative statement of 
Yemen's arms relationship with North Korea and/or he wants 
the Embassy to do the ROYG interagency coordination of this 
issue.  We have already requested a meeting with the MOD to 
follow up.  End Comment. 
HULL