This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 000222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPT. FOR NEA/FO, NEA/ARP, S/ES-O 
DEPT FOR DS, DSS, DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/21/2013 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PREL OIIP KU
SUBJECT: (U) ONE AMCIT KILLED, ONE WOUNDED IN KUWAIT 
SHOOTING 
 
 ¶1. (SBU/NF) At approximately 9:20 a.m. local time, two U.S. 
citizen civilian DoD contract employees working at Camp Doha, 
Kuwait were shot in their vehicle, a Toyota Prado, while it 
sat at a traffic light at the intersection of Route 85 and 
Route 7, heading from Camp Doha.  They were wearing civilian 
clothing and their vehicle was unmarked.  According to U.S. 
Army CID, at least one gunman behind bushes approximately 20 
yards from the vehicle on the passenger side fired over 20 
rounds of 7.62 mm into the vehicle.  The Embassy first heard 
of this incident shortly before 10:00 a.m., and the DCM 
phoned an initial report to the Operations Center. 
 
¶2.  (SBU/NF) According to U.S. Army CID, the passenger, 
identified as Michael Pouliote, was killed and the driver, 
identified as David Caraway, was wounded by multiple bullets; 
at last report, Caraway had been taken to hospital and was in 
critical but stable condition.  Embassy personnel are 
intensively engaged in following up the various aspects of 
this matter. 
 
¶3. (U) Proposed press guidance follows: 
 
"Two U.S. civilian contractors working for the U.S. military 
in Kuwait were shot this morning in a terrorist attack at 
approximately 9:20 a.m. (1:20 a.m. EST) at the intersection 
of Route 7 and Route 85 in Kuwait.  Both men sustained 
multiple gunshot wounds.  One individual was killed and the 
other was taken to hospital in critical but stable condition. 
 The incident is currently under investigation by Kuwaiti and 
U.S. Army CID authorities. 
 
U.S. Ambassador Richard Jones said, "We condemn this 
terrorist incident which has tragically cost the life of an 
innocent American citizen.  We have full confidence that the 
Kuwaiti authorities will pursue their investigation of the 
incident vigorously and professionally.  We stand ready to 
assist them in any way possible as they work to bring the 
assailant to justice." 
 
- (If asked):  names of the victims are being withheld in 
keeping with the Privacy Act and pending notification of next 
of kin. 
 
¶4.  (U) Proposed warden message follows:  "Two U.S. civilian 
contractors working for the U.S. military in Kuwait were shot 
this morning in a terrorist attack at approximately 9:20 a.m. 
(1:20 a.m. EST) at the intersection of Route 7 and Route 85 
in Kuwait.  One individual was killed and the other is in 
critical condition.  Both men sustained multiple gunshot 
wounds.  The incident is currently under investigation by 
Kuwaiti and U.S. authorities.  The Embassy reminds all 
American citizens in Kuwait to be alert to their surroundings 
and continually assess their security, to include varying the 
times and routes of their movements." 
JONES