This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 006619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM TU
SUBJECT: MFA DEPUTY U/S BOZKIR OPTIMISTIC ABOUT TURKEY'S EU 
CHANCES BUT ADMITS CYPRUS STILL AN OBSTACLE 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman. Reason: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In a Oct. 20 courtesy call, MFA Deputy U/S 
for EU affairs Bozkir told the Ambassador that he is 
optimistic about Turkey's EU prospects.  The GOT has passed 
the necessary laws related to the Copenhagen Criteria. 
Bozkir admitted that Cyprus is a looming problem but added 
that a positive EU progress report next month could build on 
pro-EU public sentiment to spur a solution on the island. End 
Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) In his initial Oct. 20 call on MFA Deputy Under 
Secretary Volkan Bozkir, who is responsible for relations 
 
SIPDIS 
with the EU, Ambassador reiterated strong U.S. support for 
Turkey's EU candidacy.  While applauding GOT efforts to pass 
EU-related legislation, Ambassador stressed that 
implementation will be important.  He noted that Turkey's 
chances of becoming a full EU member could be hurt a solution 
if not found for Cyprus by next spring. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Bozkir said that there has been a change in psychology 
in Turkey since the end of the PKK threat in 1999.  Turks at 
all levels understand that achieving EU membership will be 
beneficial for all of Turkey.  Firm GOT support has helped to 
get the message out.  Even the bureaucracy does not want to 
be an obstacle to membership anymore, he claimed. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Bozkir asserted that legally, Turkey has "achieved 
critical mass" with regard to the Copenhagen Criteria. 
Bozkir acknowledged that implementation is really only now 
beginning but said that the legal framework for 
implementation is in place.  Bozkir said he is optimistic 
concerning the EU progress report, which will be released at 
the beginning of November.  At the moment, EU countries are 
giving Turkey a consistent message: Turkey has done well; 
focus on implementation; and work to solve Cyprus. 
 
 
¶5. (C) A positive progress report, he said, will boost public 
support for the EU and could give the GOT room to work on 
more difficult issues, such as Cyprus.  Bozkir claimed, 
however, that even with a positive report, the GOT may not 
make progress on Cyprus because of Turkish local elections in 
March 2004.  Noting that his office only peripherally deals 
with Cyprus, Bozkir argued that the EU Commission needs to be 
more flexible on Cyprus and that lifting the economic embargo 
against the "TRNC" would be a helpful gesture. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Bozkir said that in addition to maintaining in close 
contact with his counterparts in Italy, which currently holds 
the EU Presidency, he has had consultations with the Irish, 
who will hold the Presidency the first half of 2004, and the 
Netherlands.  The Netherlands will hold the Presidency during 
the crucial Dec. 2004 EU summit where EU members will decide 
whether Turkey is to begin negotiations.  Bozkir acknowledged 
that the Netherlands is concerned about the prospect of 
Turkey's EU membership but said that the new Dutch government 
appears to be more flexible. 
EDELMAN