This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR INL/C/CP, DRL/PHD, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KJUS KCRM PHUM SOCI PINR HO
SUBJECT: ACCUSATIONS OF WRONGDOING PLAGUE HONDURAN CHIEF OF 
POLICE 
 
¶1. (U) On December 10, Aida Romero, Special Prosecutor for 
Human Rights, accused Chief of Police, Coralia Rivera Ramos, 
Commissioner Mirna Suazo, and the assistant to the Minister 
of Public Security, Juan Manuel Aguilar, with obstruction of 
justice and abuse of power.  According to the prosecutor, 
these officials were responsible for the destruction of six 
AK-47s, which were being held as evidence in pending 
investigations of various alleged extrajudicial killings. 
 
¶2. (U) According to press reports, the investigation showed 
that both Sauzo and Aguilar directly participated in the 
destruction of the weapons.  Afterwards, it is presumed that 
the Chief of Police directed a "cover-up" and instructed 
those involved to lie to investigators. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Post had heard that the Police Internal Affairs 
office had completed its recommendation for criminal 
investigation and prosecution and had numerous more serious 
charges to file, including: charges against Ramos for 
conspiracy in the murder of alleged kidnappers, obstruction 
of justice (for attempting to cover up the ordering of a 
murder as well as the destruction of evidence), 
misappropriation of funds, and abuse of power; Sauzo was to 
be formally charged for conspiracy in the murder of alleged 
kidnappers, obstruction of justice (for attempting to cover 
up the ordering of the destruction of evidence), and the 
misappropriation of funds.  It is not clear why these more 
serious charges were not filed. 
 
¶4. (U) According to Human Rights Commissioner Ramon Custodio, 
the results of the investigation have been known to the 
Public Ministry since last year.  Custodio has stated 
publicly that action against these individuals should have 
been taken well before now to prevent Honduras from being 
known around the world as a country where impunity impedes 
the rule of law. 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT:  If Custodio's accusations are accurate, 
this demonstrates yet again the reluctance within the Public 
Ministry to prosecute high-ranking officials.  Also, as 
previously mentioned, it had been reported to Post that 
charges brought against these individuals would include 
conspiracy charges.  It now appears that by dropping the more 
serious charges, the accused will receive little more than a 
slap on the wrist, if they are convicted.  END COMMENT. 
Palmer