This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KATHMANDU 001849 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, PRM: MPITOTTI 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/22/2013 
TAGS: PREF PTER NP BH
SUBJECT: NEPAL: MAOISTS ATTACK POLICE INSIDE BHUTANESE 
 
REFUGEE CAMP 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  On September 22, Post received reports from 
WFP and UNHCR that as many as 150 Maoists attacked the police 
post inside a Bhutanese refugee camp in Eastern Nepal, 
killing one unarmed police officer.  No refugees were injured 
in the attacks.  According to UNHCR, the Home Ministry has 
decided to withdraw all permanent police personnel from the 
six refugee camps.  Contrary to WFP and UNHCR reports, Police 
sources indicate that only 10-12 Maoist assailants entered 
the camp.  Due to the absence of reliable eye witnesses, the 
number of Maoist attackers has not been verified.  Although 
the absence of a permanent police presence in the refugee 
camps may deter further Maoist attacks, it may also prove 
easier for the insurgents to recruit the young and unemployed 
Bhutanese refugees.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) At approximately 2230 hours on September 21, an 
unverified number of Maoists attacked the main police post 
within the Khundunabari Bhutanese refugee camp in Eastern 
Nepal, killing one National Police Assistant Sub-Inspector. 
World Food Program Country Director Erika Jorgenson informed 
PolOff on September 22 that WFP field officers in 
Khundunabari Camp had reported that as many as 150 Maoist 
insurgents entered the camp late Sunday night, attacking the 
police post.  Jorgenson indicated that Khundunabari Camp 
residents fear that this attack is only the beginning of more 
Maoist incursions into the Bhutanese refugee communities. 
 
¶3. (C) The UNHCR protection officer was not present at the 
camps at the time of the incident, but traveled back to Jhapa 
the morning of September 22.  Subsequently, UNHCR Deputy 
Country Director Thangarajah Kugathasan confirmed that 150 
armed Maoists attacked the Khundunabari Camp police post. 
According to Kuguthasan, the Home Ministry has decided to 
withdraw all police personnel from the refugee camps to a 
more secure location at District Headquarters, although the 
police will conduct mobile patrols in and around the camps. 
Kuguthasan has requested guidance on this issue from UNHCR 
headquarters in Geneva. 
 
¶4. (C) Contrary to WFP and UNHCR reports, police sources 
indicate that only between 10-12 Maoists entered the camp and 
exploded a bomb near the police post in Khundunabari Camp. 
The Maoists then entered the police post, killed the police 
officer-in-charge with a pistol shot to the temple and tied 
the hands of the other four police officers present. 
According to the police, five unarmed police personnel were 
deployed in each of the six Bhutanese refugee camps and were 
reimbursed by UNHCR. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment.  Security within the refugee camps has been 
an issue of concern for UNHCR and diplomatic missions in 
Nepal as reports that Maoists might attempt to recruit the 
young, unemployed Bhutanese refugees have increased. 
However, all reports of the attack have suggested that the 
assailants entered Khundunabari Camp from outside.  Although 
the removal of police forces from the UNHCR camps might 
remove the threat of further Maoist attacks, Post is 
concerned that withdrawal of police forces from the camps 
might allow for easier infiltration by Maoist recruiters. 
End Comment. 
 
MALINOWSKI