This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001949 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM JO
SUBJECT: TFIZ01 THE IRAQI WAR THROUGH JORDANIAN EYES 
 
 
The  following  cable, which describes  Jordanian  sentiment 
towards the war, was drafted by an Embassy Amman FSN. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  Almost two  weeks  into  the  war,  and 
Jordanians   remain   fully  engrossed   with   the   latest 
developments in Iraq. Although many have resumed their daily 
activities, a widening resentment towards the US has  become 
virtually  a universal sentiment and an accepted  truth.  As 
the   coalition   troops   push  forward,   Jordanians   are 
articulating  revulsion  for  everything  American,  and   a 
newfound  pride  for  everything Iraqi.  Religious  leaders, 
political  opposition  parties, churchgoers  and  modernists 
have all come to share a common ground: Anti-Americanism (on 
the same level as Anti-Israelism). END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------- 
JORDANIAN PRIDE IN VALIANT IRAQIS 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) This collective attitude has manifested itself  in 
numerous  ways. One clear example has been the rejoicing  of 
many  Jordanians for the Republican Guard tanks that  bolted 
out  of Basra. Following that episode, conversations shifted 
from  a focus on "US arrogance" and the legality of war,  to 
the bravery and toughness of the Iraqi people: "did you hear 
how  the  republican guard sent 1000 vehicles to the  enemy, 
they  have  guts." "The Iraqi people remain defiant  in  the 
face  of  awesome US might." Articles in the  press  aim  to 
complete  and confirm such sentiments with titles  such  as: 
"Iraqi's challenge to the coalition stops their land crawl." 
 
-------------- 
SUSTAINED RAGE 
-------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The new levels of mistrust that many here feel for 
the  US  has  only  added  to  the  frustrations  and  anger 
accumulated  over years of the Intifada and  US  support  of 
Israel. This war is not viewed as separate from the Israeli- 
Palestinian conflict - rather it is perceived as yet another 
episode  in  the  "US/Zionist  assault  on  Arabs."   People 
continue to watch TV and listen to their radios just to  see 
and  hear evidence for what they already believe: That  Iraq 
is defending its land against neo-colonialism. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  This  sentiment is the  same  across  the  board, 
although  it  is  expressed  in a  variety  of  forms.  Some 
Jordanians   watch   the   news  around   the   clock   with 
interruptions for lunch and work. The religious  spend  more 
time  in  prayer  and in mosques. The young  and  able  join 
protests and peace vigils when held. Artists paint images of 
war and murals in support of Iraq. Jordan Radio plays somber 
music  to reflect the mood of the country.  Some have chosen 
to  cancel  weddings and parties. People  mostly  gather  at 
homes of family members and close friends to watch the  news 
and  talk about the war. Fundraisers and blood donations are 
held  by  various  Unions  and Universities.  A  very  small 
segment (mostly of upper class Jordanians) has resumed going 
out  to restaurants, to movie theaters, or to the mall -  if 
only  for  a respite from the tensions and emotions  of  the 
moment. Whatever and however people chose to deal and handle 
the  situation, all conversations lead back to the war,  and 
the  general  mood  and tone of any gathering  is  ominously 
unhappy and frustrated. 
 
GNEHM