This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001798 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZ01:  KING ABDULLAH, GOJ RETRENCH IN FACE OF 
PUBLIC ANGER AGAINST WAR IN IRAQ, BUT STILL SUPPORT US 
WHERE IT MATTERS 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 1675 
     ¶B. AMMAN 1706 
     ¶C. AMMAN 1718 
     ¶D. FBIS GMP20030323000339 
     ¶E. FBIS GMP20030323000308 
     ¶F. FBIS GMP20030323000292 
     ¶G. FBIS GMP20030324000163 
     ¶H. AMMAN 1774 
 
Classified By: A/DCM Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  The sharp and angry public reaction to the start of 
war in Iraq has forced King Abdullah and the GOJ to alter 
their public line to deal with the public ire.  In a speech 
by King Abdullah on March 21, a press conference the next day 
with the PM, FonMin and InfoMin, and official news agency 
reports of cabinet and other meetings, the GOJ is trying to 
create the impression that it is working to end the war in 
Iraq.   PM Abul Ragheb told the Ambassador March 24 that GOJ 
officials will have to say things the U.S. does not like to 
address public anger, but will choose their words carefully. 
The King has decided that he needs to be seen as working to 
end hostilities, although he has backed off slightly from an 
announced new diplomatic initiative, including a planned 
phone call to President Bush.  Despite the public pressure, 
the GOJ has continued its support to coalition forces, has 
frozen Iraqi government assets, and has expelled Iraqi 
intelligence officers.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------- 
ANGRY PUBLIC REACTION RATTLES GOJ 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S)  The enraged Jordanian public reaction to the 
beginning of hostilities in Iraq (refs a and b and septel) 
has caused senior GOJ officials to rethink their public 
strategy.  Our security liaison contacts have expressed 
concern over the mounting level of anti-U.S. feeling the war 
has engendered, and do not want those emotions projected onto 
the King or government. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The King, Prime Minister Abul Ragheb, other senior 
officials, and the official Petra news agency have 
consequently focused their statements on expressions of 
opposition to hostilities (in almost exclusively humanitarian 
terms) and sympathy with the Iraqi people.  The King in his 
March 21 speech to the nation (ref c) called for calm in 
Jordan, and tried to focus attention on what Jordan can do 
for the future of Iraqis.  In a joint press conference March 
23 with Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher and Information 
Minister Mohammad Adwan, the Prime Minister announced the 
GOJ's opposition to the war, as well as a new Jordanian 
diplomatic initiative to end it (refs d and e).  The King was 
quoted as telling a cabinet meeting on March 23 that "we must 
work to stop the war against Iraq quickly," and denying that 
coalition aircraft were using Jordanian airspace to attack 
Iraq (ref f).  The King reiterated the no-overflight 
statement to members of the Senate March 24, and said 
Jordanian territory would not be used to convey troops into 
Iraq that were to have gone through Turkey (ref g). 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
PM:  WE'LL HAVE TO SAY THINGS YOU WON'T LIKE 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S)  PM Abul Ragheb told the Ambassador March 24 that he 
had carefully chosen his words during the March 23 news 
conference, noting that he had not used "words like killing, 
aggression, bombing," but instead had spoken of "military 
action" and the need to work to "save people's lives."  That 
said, "we need to show our people we are really doing 
something" to end the war.  Hence, Jordan was launching a new 
diplomatic offensive "to find a resolution acceptable to all 
parties." 
 
¶5.  (S)  He said that, long before the outbreak of war, he 
had told the Ambassador that the GOJ "would have to say 
things you won't like."  Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher, 
Abul Ragheb said, had also made this point to Secretary 
Powell in their recent phone conversation.  The bottom line, 
the PM emphasized, is that Jordanians see pictures of people 
getting killed in Iraq in a war they do not support, and they 
are angry.  The GOJ is taking steps to keep the level of 
public protest down, and he planned to meet with opposition 
party leaders in the next few days to reiterate that the GOJ 
will permit pre-approved rallies, but will crack down on 
un-approved protests or the use of violence. 
 
¶6.  (S)  The Ambassador pushed back, saying that, now that 
the war has begun, it is clear that Saddam Hussein and his 
regime are finished.  Jordan would have to consider the 
effect of its statements now on a post-Saddam government in 
Baghdad, and on the U.S.  Backpedaling somewhat, Abul Ragheb 
responded that the GOJ has "determined that this will not be 
like 1991." 
--------------------- 
POSITIVE NEWS AS WELL 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  Despite the increasingly anti-war public 
statements, the GOJ continues to take more quiet steps to 
support the coalition.  The GOJ has continued its previously 
agreed military support to coalition forces (with a few minor 
hiccups).  Jordan has frozen the assets of the Iraqi 
government in Jordan (ref h).  It has also expelled several 
Iraqi intelligence officers operating under diplomatic and 
non-official cover, although there is now some question about 
who and how many Iraqis have been kicked out.  The GOJ has 
also been helped by the lack of an economic crisis associated 
with the war in Iraq.  There has been no capital flight, 
there are adequate stocks of food and fuel, the Amman stock 
exchange has remained stable, and three European air carriers 
have resumed earlier suspended flights into Amman. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (S)  The King has told the Ambassador and senior USG 
officials several times that he believed the "tipping point" 
for the Jordanian public's reaction to war in Iraq would be 
scenes on al-Jazeera TV of jubilant Iraqis celebrating their 
liberation from Saddam Hussein.  The King expected this in 
the early days of the war, and the lack of such scenes has 
made him feel exposed.  Iraqi VP Taha Yassin Ramadan's 
ranting March 25 press conference attack on Jordan's support 
for the coalition has heightened anxiety. 
 
¶9.  (S)  Given his political exposure, the King has moved to 
distance himself personally and the GOJ in general from 
military action, and has considered launching a series of 
phone calls to P-5 leaders and UN Secretary General Annan 
(although he rethought his planned March 25 call to the 
President).  He wants to be able to tell his people that he 
is actively engaged in finding an end to the war, even if he 
is powerless to stop it.  The Foreign Minister has stressed, 
however, that the King is determined to do nothing that 
undercuts the President's decision to topple Saddam Hussein. 
GNEHM