This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 HARARE 001711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/22/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM ZI MDC ZANU PF
SUBJECT: TALKS ON TALKS: MOMENTUM TOWARD ZIMBABWE POLITICAL 
DIALOGUE REMAINS ELUSIVE 
 
REF: (A) HARARE 1600 (B) HARARE 1599 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL OFFICER WIN DAYTON; REASON - SECTION 1.5 (B) ( 
D) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: A series of meetings between political 
players here and HIRC Africa Subcommittee staffer Malik Chaka 
illuminated the tentative state of play of various efforts to 
get ZANU-PF/MDC talks resumed.  ZANU-PF Chairman John Nkomo 
highlighted improvements in the political atmosphere and 
emphasized the ruling party's willingness to undertake 
dialogue with the opposition -- after a few obstacles were 
removed.  For its part, the MDC leadership conceded that 
ZANU-PF had made some positive moves but indicated that 
Mugabe's party still appeared unwilling to consider 
meaningful change.  These and other meetings, including one 
with members of the bishops troika, indicate that the 
bishops' initiative most likely is dead as a potential formal 
mediating mechanism, although the parties continue to talk 
quietly in other channels about getting dialogue going -- 
directly and through the South African Government.  Although 
ZANU-PF appears to be dragging its feet for now, it may yet 
agree to commencement of some form of talks before the end of 
the year -- presumably strategically timed for maximum 
domestic and international public relations benefit.  The 
cordial tone and relatively open access extended by the 
government to Chaka may signal government interest in a less 
hostile relationship with the USG.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Nkomo Underscores ZANU-PF Interest in Talks 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) ZANU-PF Chairman John Nkomo warmly welcomed Chaka and 
Ambassador Sullivan to his office for an hour-plus meeting 
August 20.  Nkomo asserted that the worst was over in 
Zimbabwe and that all parties recognized the need to 
collaborate in addressing the country's difficulties. 
ZANU-PF was not "anti-opposition," he explained; aside from a 
few issues such as land redistribution, the parties were 
separated only by a difference in focus that was magnified by 
rhetoric.  This generated unnecessary tension that already 
had absorbed too much time and resources. 
 
¶3.  (C) Nkomo emphasized that ZANU-PF and MDC representatives 
were talking on an individual basis.  Negotiating teams 
already were in place, although "structure was still 
preliminary" and commencing formal talks now would be 
premature.  Litigation initiated by each side hampered 
efforts at constructive engagement.  Nkomo maintained that 
resolution of the legitimacy issue needed to precede talks -- 
"on what basis can we relate if we are not recognized?" 
Nonetheless, both parties were contributing to improving 
atmospherics that would eventually support commencement of 
dialogue.  The opposition's appearance in parliament was an 
example of such measures and  evidenced that the parties were 
talking.  "To the outside, we appear enemies; when we meet, 
we are not enemies."  Nkomo dismissed the sometimes shrill 
voices on both sides that opposed dialogue as a misinformed, 
irrelevant minority.  Mugabe himself wanted to see the 
impasse resolved.  Contradicting his own earlier assertion 
that talks were premature, he said talks could restart any 
time. 
 
¶4.  (C) Turning to the bishops' initiative to jump start 
political dialogue, Nkomo essentially confirmed the bishops' 
chronology of exchanges between the party and the bishops 
(ref B).  As to their substantive role, however, ZANU-PF saw 
the bishops only as facilitators of dialogue; they were 
welcomed "between the parties" but not as formal mediators. 
The churchmen had exceeded their brief in soliciting agendas, 
according to Nkomo.  For now, ZANU-PF would continue to talk 
to them and hoped they would foster a positive atmosphere for 
talks. 
 
¶5.  (C) Nkomo acknowledged a constructive role for South 
Africa in moving toward dialogue.  He had met with Thabo 
Mbeki three weeks before and knew the SAG had received 
delegations from both sides.  For his part, he had assured 
Mbeki that things were moving, ZANU-PF had accepted a church 
role, and intra-parliamentary relations were productive. 
 
¶6.  (C) Nkomo stressed that the political environment was at 
the root of Zimbabwe's economic crisis.  Policies lacked 
cohesion and both domestic and international players had lost 
confidence in Zimbabwe.  Regulatory systems were collapsing 
and businesses were paralyzed by uncertainty.  Nkomo opined 
that rains could yet save Zimbabwe, but that the starting 
point for sustainable recovery in any event was to stem the 
collapse in confidence -- this had to start with progress on 
the political front.  Zimbabwe was part of the globalized 
community and needed international assistance.  The GOZ was 
working discreetly at the ministerial level to inquire at the 
IMF and World Bank about possible prescriptions for 
re-engagement and he was confident they would return once 
political progress was firmly established.  Nkomo 
akcnowledged the importance of NGO work in Zimbabwe and 
elaborated on recently announced adjustments to humanitarian 
relief distrubition channels (reported septel).  In the 
meantime, resource constraints stemming from economic crisis 
complicated politics.  After alluding to earlier U.S. and 
U.K. commitments to fund land redistribution, Nkomo 
acknowledged the need to review progress and mistakes in land 
reform.  In this regard, the Utete Commission report under 
review would help guide future action. 
 
MDC Leaders Warily Pushing for Talks 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (C) Ambassador Sullivan's lunch for Chaka on August 21 
was attended by MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai, Vice 
President Gibson Sibanda, Secretary General Welshman Ncube, 
Deputy Secretary General Gift Chimanakire, and Director for 
Presidential Affairs Gandi Mudzingwa.  The MDC leadership 
reported that they were seeing more openness and 
communication from ZANU-PF.  Justice Minister Patrick 
Chinamasa had been the one to propose and work for MDC 
attendance at Mugabe's parliamentary address.  Inter-party 
relations had improved in parliament, where MPs were being 
given some latitude in reporting views out of committee, for 
example.  On the campaign front, police had facilitated 
Tsvangirai's stumping efforts in Victoria Falls, and "Green 
 
SIPDIS 
Bombers" intimidating MDC activists in Gwanda had been 
arrested.  Nonetheless, ZANU-PF intimidation and/or 
harassment continued at varying levels throughout the 
country, especially in rural areas, and risked reaching a 
self-sustaining level. 
 
¶8.  (C) As to the substance of inter-party contacts, Ncube 
cast as "unreal" ZANU-PF's four principal demands -- 
irreversability of land reform, non-interference by 
international community, recognition of the role of the 
liberation struggle, and "sovereignty."  ZANU-PF 
interlocutors characterized issues raised by MDC (e.g., 
democratic processes, fuel crisis, inflation) as "symptoms" 
and not necessarily appropriate for talks at this stage. 
Ncube remarked on the consistency of ZANU-PF interlocutors on 
substance, notwithstanding the ad hoc appearance of different 
channels of communication.  Tsvangirai asserted that 
ZANU-PF's apparent hesitancy was most likely calculated and 
not reflective of significant division in its ranks. 
Nonetheless, as long as succession was an open question, 
mutual suspicions and divergent self-interest of ZANU-PF 
principals would be a potential impediment to meaningful 
dialogue.  It was in the interest of each aspiring successor 
to be seen as the one able to deliver Mugabe the longest stay 
in power.  No formal negotiating teams had been set by either 
side, aside from the potential to carry over the composition 
of last year's suspended talks. 
 
¶9.  (C) Elaborating on ZANU-PF succession, Tsvangirai 
observed that the possibly imminent demise of Vice President 
Mudenza (reportedly on life support) could prompt a 
"restructuring excercise" with implications for succession. 
Mugabe's appointment could indicate his chosen successor, but 
such a forced choice would only be accepted by the party 
until the next election.  Tsvangirai identified potential 
successors as Parliamentary Speaker Emmerson Mnangagwa, 
Solomon Majuro, former Finance Minister Simba Makoni, with 
Defense Minister Sidney Sikeremayi as a possible compromise 
candidate; he dismissed John Nkomo as lacking any important 
constituency.  In any event, he predicted ZANU-PF would rally 
around a compromise candidate if one were named. 
 
¶10.  (C) Speculating about South Africa's intentions, 
Tsvangirai asserted that Mbeki "knew that time was flying." 
 
SIPDIS 
Most SAG efforts appeared geared to getting progress underway 
before the Commonwealth heads of government December meeting 
(CHOGM) in Abuja, presumably with a view to having Zimbabwe's 
suspension lifted.  Support continued to be strong within the 
Commonwealth for Zimbabwe's continued suspension but the 
South Africans already were preparing to have the suspension 
on the CHOGM agenda.  The South Africans were becoming 
frustrated as "promises were not being kept," however, and 
perhaps it was time for Mbeki to assert himself personally. 
Tsvangirai said he thought that SAG direct pressure on Mugabe 
 
SIPDIS 
could be decisive in getting ZANU-PF to the table, but the 
MDC leadership present was uncertain how far the SAG intended 
to push in that regard.  Like others, the South Africans were 
constrained by ZANU-PF succession issues -- "the transition 
within a transition."  Ncube concluded that the suspension 
would continue if the CHOGM consultations were private, but 
that public positions could prove problematic.  He counted 
Ghana, Botswana, and Kenya in the camp for continued 
suspension, and suggested that Nigeria's decision on whether 
to invite Mugabe to the meeting could indicate which way the 
wind was blowing. 
 
¶11.  (C) The leadership noted a tension between its sense 
that the public was not ripe for renewed mass action and 
rank-and-file pressure to forego negotiation for a more 
provocative posture.  The cash crisis could spark unrest in 
rural areas, where most people lacked any other medium of 
commerce.  In any event, concerted mass action would likely 
alienate South Africa at a particularly inopportune time. 
The leadership said they quietly hoped that the Zimbabwe 
Confederation of Trade Unions (ZCTU) would decide in upcoming 
meetings to take some form of overt action that would press 
the government (and the South Africans) without the MDC 
having to serve as lightning rod. 
 
¶12.  (C) The leadership detailed its strategy for the 
election petition, scheduled to go to court on November 3. 
The presiding judge had yet to be named but would certainly 
be controlled by the government; thus, a final decision 
against the petitioners was certain.  The best the leadership 
could hope for was that its compelling case would be openly 
aired and that the court would find for petitioners on some 
potentially high-profile pre-decisional procedural motions. 
Media management would be important, and the party would 
undertake to get coverage through South Africa even if the 
international press were excluded from local proceedings. 
Facing the threat of a contempt order for allegedly trying to 
influence the court's decision, MDC would be very sensitive 
and cautious in its media strategy.  Tsvangirai predicted 
that ZANU-PF, anticipating potentially embarrassing 
developments at the hearing, could be expected to generate 
positive publicity in late October, perhaps with a push to 
get some kind of talks going.  The case could drag on for 
months as part of ZANU-PF's strategy of bleeding the MDC 
through legal fees (the MDC's biggest budget line item). 
 
Makoni Optimistic About ZANU-PF Reform 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (C) In a meeting on August 21 with Chaka and Ambassador 
Sullivan, former Finance Minister Simba Makoni sounded upbeat 
on the prospect for political progress in Zimbabwe.  Echoing 
Nkomo, he asserted that the root cause of Zimbabwe's crisis 
was "the way we have done our politics."  Economic problems 
were symptoms of "political malaise."  According to Makoni, 
ZANU-PF membership was nearly united in support for change 
but lacked a clear scenario through which to effect such 
change.  He concluded that a Gorbachev-style opening directed 
from the top seemed unlikely.  More likely, ZANU-PF would 
choose Mugabe's successor, who would effect a more 
constructive economic and political agenda.  Makoni said that 
inter-party dialogue may yet succeed, but that ZANU-PF 
succession was most likely to be the key to national 
reconciliation and recovery.  Makoni devoted most of the 
remainder of his comments to the economy (reported septel). 
 
Coltart Sees Unchanging ZANU-PF 
------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (C) MDC MP and Shadow Secretary for Legal Affairs David 
Coltart met with Chaka and emboffs on August 24 and sketched 
his views of ZANU-PF in the context of recent developments. 
According to Coltart, ZANU-PF's intolerance of opposition was 
deeply ingrained and went far beyond Mugabe.  He predicted 
that ZANU-PF would swallow the MDC in a government of 
national unity even if Mugabe were gone.  Notwithstanding 
differences between ZAPU and MDC, ZANU-PF's absorption of 
ZAPU in 1987 remained an applicable lesson today.  ZANU-PF 
successor aspirants would likely stick together after Mugabe 
in spite of their occasionally divergent personal interests 
and views, and Vice-President Muzenda's passing would not 
trigger significant divisions within the party.  In any 
event, there were reasonable interlocutors, such as John 
Nkomo, within the ruling party. 
 
¶15.  MDC's prospects were better than ZAPU's, Coltart 
concluded, with the absence of cold war and apartheid and 
because the economy was no longer sustainable.  Furthermore, 
ZANU-PF, in spite of relatively strong party discipline, was 
largely reactive and capable of great "stupidity."  The 
party's resort to the treason trial and Tsvangirai's 
detention, its handling of Cricket World Cup publicity, and 
attempts to control humanitarian food relief were just some 
recent examples.  The key to countering ZANU-PF's intolerant 
nature lay in reinforcement and construction of institutional 
balances within government and civil society. 
 
¶16.  (C) As to recent evidence of a thawing in inter-party 
relations, Coltart conceded that there had been superficial 
improvements, including more free campaigning.  Violence 
levels seemed down, although areas such as his home district 
Bulawayo had seen relatively violence-free elections before. 
Even without violence, however, ZANU-PF continued to resort 
to underhanded tactics that compromised the election's 
freeness and fairness.  In Bulawayo, for example, the 
election registrar only shared election rolls with the MDC 
very late and after weeks of requests; one of the five rolls 
remained outstanding just one week before the election. 
Distribution of food and other benefits also was as 
politicized as ever, with ZANU-PF cards necessary for receipt 
of government-supplied maize on a widespread basis throughout 
the country. 
 
¶17.  (U) Coltart reported that he intended to be in an 
inter-party Zimbabwean delegation traveling to the United 
States to participate in a Parliamentarians for Global Action 
event, and planned to be in Washington September 15-16. 
 
Churchmen on Fostering Atmospherics 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (C) In a meeting with Chaka and poloffs on August 23 at 
the residence of President of the Evangelical Fellowship of 
Zimbabwe Bishop Trevor Manhanga, Manhanga and President of 
the Zimbabwe Catholic Bishops Conference Bishop Patrick 
Mutume detailed obstacles to resumption of political 
dialogue.  They said that ZANU-PF continued to engage with 
them, notwithstanding the Justice Minister's critical 
outburst and Nkomo's vacillation about their role.  In 
private, ZANU-PF interlocutors asserted that legitimacy, the 
election contest, and the MDC's foreign connections 
constituted obstacles to commencement of talks.  The bishops 
dismissed ZANU-PF's public assertions that there had been no 
agreement about submission of agendas but recognized that 
ZANU-PF was not now prepared to move forward on their 
initiative.  According to the bishops, the party was 
handicapped by the dissonance of senior officials' individual 
interests and an inability to resolve its succession issue. 
The economic crisis was distracting, especially with ruling 
party figures striving to exploit the evolving environment at 
opposition expense.  Publicity and a partisan press further 
hindered efforts to bridge differences.  Sensationalist 
coverage of Mugabe's Heroes Day speech (ref A), for example, 
ignored  his markedly moderate tone and scaled back rhetoric, 
and missed an opportunity to project positive atmospherics 
conducive to  dialogue. 
 
¶19.  (C) The bishops said they were undeterred by ZANU-PF's 
cold shoulder and were still operating under Mugabe's 
invitation to see what they could do (ref B).  They asserted 
that atmospherics were improving between the parties, who 
seemed to be posturing toward some re-engagement albeit with 
different degrees of enthusiasm.  Particularly encouraging 
were recent developments in their Mutare district.  The two 
received a very warm welcome at a local ZANU-PF public event 
conducted the night before with all senior local officials 
and Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa in attendance.  (As an 
aside, the bishops lamented that Chinamasa was the only 
government minister from Manicaland, leaving Manicaland 
essentially unrepresented in the government.)  All speakers 
publicly recognized the bishops' attendance with gratitude 
and Manhanga was invited to offer a closing benediction. 
Chinamasa had appeared somewhat taken aback by their presence 
and offered a moderate statement with only one back-handed 
reference to the churches' association with foreign 
interests.  Separately, the bishops had gotten all three 
candidates for mayor in the August 30-31 election to agree 
publicly to abide by a code of conduct, with the churches' 
acting as intermediaries to help resolve complaints.   The 
bishops' were taking the initiative at the local level with a 
view possibly to introducing it more widely in future 
elections if it proved successful. 
 
¶20.  (C) On the international front, the bishops advised that 
President Mbeki was ready to meet with them but they wanted 
first to have progress to show for their efforts. 
Nevertheless, if nothing developed soon, they would visit him 
for assistance.   With a view to further inducing Mugabe to 
move forward, they again (ref B) inquired what developments 
would permit the international community to resume a more 
normalized relationship with Zimbabwe. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶21.  (C) The Chaka staffdel offered a well-timed opportunity 
to engage a host of key participants privately on the status 
of Zimbabwe's talks on talks.  The broad and high-level 
access afforded Chaka -- surprising and unmatched in the past 
year -- may bear testament to interest among the ZANU-PF 
leadership in projecting the impression that it is serious 
about political dialogue and Zimbabwe's international 
relations.  At the same time, the party has yet to indicate 
definitively that it will commence talks or, much less, on 
what terms.  Certainly, the breadth and generality of the 
issues framed by the parties (e.g., "legitimacy," "free and 
fair elections"), while potentially polarizing, leave room 
for finesse and resolution should both parties muster the 
will to talk.  Nkomo's concession that political progress 
must precede economic recovery echoes a long-standing 
conclusion of many regime critics, but it is not at all clear 
that the belief is shared by his boss.  Indeed, Mugabe's 
personal views on succession remain a decisive but still 
uncertain factor in the talks equation. 
 
¶22.  (C) Whether ZANU-PF's temporizing is a conscious 
strategy or reflective of internal indecision, the ruling 
party appears so far to sit in the catbird's seat on the 
timing of talks.  For its part, the MDC can be expected to 
continue pressing for talks but might later seek to hold out 
for concessions if it perceives ZANU-PF wants the talks badly 
enough.  Weakening the MDC's hand is the reality that Mugabe 
and his inner circle appear to be impervious to the suffering 
associated with country's political impasse and economic 
collapse.  The government's interest in its Commonwealth 
status and future re-engagement by international financial 
institutions is real but not ultimately decisive.  It remains 
unclear how assertive South Africa is being with the regime, 
or how the regime would respond to various degrees of South 
African pressure. 
 
¶23.  (C) Even if ZANU-PF's professed interest in meaningful 
talks is entirely disingenuous, its nascent efforts at a more 
cooperative posture are a potentially positive incremental 
development.  It is becoming more acceptable for long-cowed 
ZANU-PF elements to be seen with and to talk with regime 
critics.  This opening, which may encompass diplomatic and 
civil society circles as well, may subject the ZANU-PF to 
greater influence from the outside and stimulate more genuine 
debate within the party, although this is not a given. 
Cross-party confidence-building at a personal level may begin 
to take on a life of its own regardless of party leadership 
intentions -- an objective underlying in part the bishops' 
indefatigable efforts. 
 
¶24.  (C)  This weekend's scheduled parliamentary by-elections 
and mayoral and urban council elections (septel) will offer 
another potential benchmark by which to measure inter-party 
relations and atmospherics for talks.  The government's 
response to international outcry over announced adjustments 
to humanitarian food distribution procedures (septel) will 
further indicate its sensitivity to international opinion and 
the extent to which it is willing to exploit the politics of 
suffering. 
SULLIVAN