This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 002103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IO/PHO, NEA/IPA, WHA/CAN, AND EAP/J 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/23/2013 
TAGS: KPKO PREL IS SY CA JA
SUBJECT: UNDOF: DRAWDOWN OF CANADIAN CONTINGENT 
 
REF: (A) STATE 210528 (B) OTTAWA 1779 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Canada confirmed to us that is does intend to reduce 
its contribution to the UN Disengagement Observer Force 
(UNDOF) over the next 12 months, but that it will not do so 
before ensuring adequate backfill by others.  We discussed 
reftel (A) concerns with Barbara Martin, Director of Foreign 
Affairs' Peacekeeping Division, including reports from third 
parties that Canada plans to withdraw from UNDOF.  Martin 
said that Canada has explicitly told UN, Israeli and Syrian 
officials that Canada intends to draw down, but not withdraw 
altogether, from UNDOF.  Martin said Canada hopes to end up 
with approximately 40 "front-line observers" in UNDOF a year 
from now, with Canadian specialty support personnel being 
replaced by other countries, most likely Japan. 
 
¶2. (C) Martin emphasized that Canada will not take any steps 
that will undermine the UNDOF mission.  She said the GoC will 
be working closely with the UN to identify backfill, and that 
the drawdown of Canadian personnel will be done in 
consultation with the UN.  She said that Japan has expressed 
interest in playing a more prominent role in UNDOF, and that 
Canada's decision should give Japan the impetus to move 
forward.  Canada will continue encouraging Japan to do so, 
and will approach other countries as well if needed. 
 
¶3. (C) Martin said that Canada continues to support UNDOF, 
but that there are a number of other countries capable of 
filling the support roles that the Canadian contingent is now 
providing.  After 30 years in UNDOF, Canada is looking to 
free up such specialty personnel for other missions. 
 
¶4. (C) COMMENT: Given Canada's strong commitment to peace in 
the Middle East, we do not believe it will leave UNDOF in the 
lurch.  We will stay in close touch with the GoC over the 
issue of backfill, and would be interested in USUN and 
Embassy Tokyo's thoughts on an increased Japanese role. 
Canada's drawdown plans reflect a more general desire to 
rationalize the Canadian Forces' presence, focusing more on 
higher-impact missions.  They also reflect the fact that the 
Canadian Forces are badly overstretched, a problem that is 
being exacerbated by the deployment of 1800 troops to ISAF. 
CELLUCCI