This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/PHD, CA/OCS/ACS/WHA, AND DS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM SNAR KCRM KJUS CASC ASEC HO
SUBJECT: LA CEIBA PRISON RIOT LEAVES 69 DEAD AND MANY 
OTHERS WOUNDED 
 
REF: 02 TEGUCIGALPA 1755 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: On April 5 a riot in El Porvenir prison, located 
just outside the Caribbean port city of La Ceiba, Honduras, 
left 69 dead and 39 wounded.  Many of the dead were gang 
members from Mara 18, one of Central America's largest gangs. 
 According to press reports, the riot broke out when a 
scuffle between inmates turned deadly after Mara 18 gangs 
members with weapons attacked non-gang member prisoners, who 
retaliated with weapons.  The non-gang inmates then 
reportedly proceeded to lock the gang members in their cell 
block and start a fire in the cell block, which killed over 
thirty gang members.  Prison authorities had previously 
confiscated some weapons in what was apparently not an 
effective search of the prison.  No AmCits were reported 
among the victims.  Post notes that Honduran prisons are 
known for their poor conditions and lax security.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. On April 5 a riot in El Porvenir (The Future) prison, 
located just outside the Caribbean port city of La Ceiba, 
Honduras, left 69 dead (66 men and three women) and 39 
wounded. According to press reports, the riot broke out 
around 10 a.m. shortly after visiting hours, when a scuffle 
between inmates turned deadly after Mara 18 gangs members 
produced four pistols and a number of machetes and attacked 
non-gang member prisoners.  (Prison authorities had 
previously confiscated some weapons in what was apparently 
not an effective search of the prison.)  Hundreds of regular 
prisoners then reportedly brandished weapons of their own, 
including smuggled grenades, and proceeded to attack Mara 18 
members.  The facility, which holds 1,600 inmates is a 
low-security prison farm where suspects facing drugs, 
weapons, rape, and assault charges are held while they await 
trial. 
 
¶3. Of the 69 killed during the riot, 61 were Mara 18 gang 
members.  According to press reports, at least half of those 
died from smoke inhalation after the cell block where they 
were trying to take refuge was locked and then set ablaze by 
other non-gang inmates.  The fire department was reportedly 
unable to enter the prison to put out the fire due to 
gunfire.  The press has reported allegations that some of the 
inmates were shot and killed by prison guards during the 
riot.  Also included among the victims were three women 
visiting the prison at the time of the uprising and five 
regular prisoners.  In the past some AmCits awaiting trial 
have been temporarily detained at El Porvenir but none were 
present when the riot broke out on April 5. 
 
¶4. Comment:  Security at El Porvenir is notoriously lax. 
Weapons and drugs are common, and in many instances interned 
gang members control whole cell blocks.  Reftel and the Human 
Rights Report both describe the poor conditions in Honduran 
prisons.  The GOH is currently investigating the incident, 
including allegations that prison guards, with the collusion 
of a privately run prison store, helped smuggle weapons into 
the prison.  End Comment. 
Palmer