This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 COLOMBO 000721 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR D, INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS(FOR JWALLER); SA/PD (FOR LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, 
WREINCKENS); SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PTER OPRC KMDR OIIP CE EGEN LTTE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY - MORE COVERAGE OF AMBASSADOR WILLS' 
4/24 REUTERS INTERVIEW ABOUT LTTE SUSPENSION OF TALKS AND 
BALASINGHAM'S REPLY 
 
REF:  COLOMBO 0714 
 
¶1.  On April 21, the LTTE announced it was suspending peace 
talks. In a letter to the GSL, the LTTE listed its reasons 
for suspending talks as: its exclusion from the 4/14 
Washington Conference, problems with the ceasefire accord 
implementation, and that GSL had not focused enough on 
rebuilding the economy of the North and East.  On 4/24, 
Reuters ran an exclusive interview with Ambassador Wills 
focusing on USG reaction to this letter. The full text of 
the interview was later released to the press (Reftel 
Colombo 0707).  On 4/25, LTTE Chief Negotiator and 
Political Advisor Anton Balasingham responded to the 
Ambassador's interview on Tamilnet, a pro-LTTE website. 
Sri Lankan media covered this exchange extensively.  While 
news coverage of the Ambassador's comments and 
Balasingham's reply were concentrated in the Tamil press; 
English, Sinhala and Tamil media responded with extensive 
editorial comment and many opinion pieces.  The main 
editorial theme in all languages was the need for the LTTE 
to heed the US and international community's words and 
return to the peace process.  Usually skeptical opposition 
ISLAND and ISLAND SUNDAY delivered predictably stronger 
versions of the same message in editorial and opinion 
pieces. 
 
----- 
Television and Radio. 
----- 
 
¶2. In their 4/26 newscasts, independent and government- 
owned Sri Lankan telecasters (MTV and SLRC,) reported on 
Balasingham's response to the Ambassador.  Independent MTV 
reported, "LTTE once again rejects US call to lay down 
arms," while government-owned SLRC noted, "Anton 
Balasingham says that they have not deviated from peace 
talks in response to US Ambassadors reaction to LTTE 
suspension." 
 
----- 
Newspapers. 
----- 
 
¶3. News coverage of the Ambassador's comments and 
Balasingham's reply were concentrated in the Tamil press. 
However, opposition English weekly, ISLAND SUNDAY, carried 
an Agence France-Presse (AFP) story as its main headline, 
"Balasingham softens stand on talks after US barrage" and 
also carried the full text of Balasingham's Tamilnet 
interview under the headline "LTTE responds to US 
Ambassador" (4/27).  AFP excerpts: "The LTTE on Saturday 
assured the United States that they were not scuttling 
talks with Sri Lanka, two days after the US ambassador here 
slammed them for suspending peace negotiations...Diplomats 
here had seen the LTTE's sudden suspension of talks as 
brinkmanship and hoped that the negotiations could resume 
soon.... LTTE negotiator Balasingham sounded conciliatory 
in his remarks in the Tamilnet website, but refused the 
give up their weapons as demanded by the US." 
 
Several Tamil papers also reported on Balasingham's 
response.  State-owned THINAKARAN (4/27) headlined 
"Balasingham explains to US Ambassador that Tigers did not 
pull out from Peace talks" and reported that the LTTE 
motive was to give the government some time to make 
decisions. Independent SUDAR OLI (4/26) noted, "'Did not 
withdraw from talks - It's only a temporary suspension' 
Balasingham replies to US Ambassador."  Independent 
THINAKKURAL (4/26) reported, "'Suspension of talks to 
provide time to the government' - Balasingham's explanation 
to Wills' comment." 
 
----- 
Editorials. 
----- 
¶4.  **** Under the headline "Heed timely advice," 
independent English Daily Mirror (4/26), commented that 
Ambassador Wills' comments "need not be taken by the Tigers 
as a loss of face, but. a reflection of increasing loss of 
patience by the international community and particularly 
USA over the LTTE's shrewd manoeuvrings." The editorial 
follows: 
"While some diplomats play cloak and dagger games with Sri 
Lanka even when they are asked to play umpire, American 
Ambassador Ashley Wills has indeed come to play an honest 
broker's role." 
 
"Here is the representative in this country of the world's 
sole super power, but the trappings of such power has not 
caused him to deliver blind sermons to us as has happened 
with envoys of some powerful countries in the past, who 
with their own agendas or having listened to the LTTE and 
their apologists' propaganda, would lecture us to no end." 
 
"Now at least the Americans appear to have understood the 
game plan of the LTTE to blame everyone else except itself. 
Ambassador Wills while acknowledging continuing 
shortcomings on the side of the Sri Lankan Government like 
it "must do a much better job of delivering services and 
assistance" and "It's way too slow and bureaucratic," has 
squarely put the blame on the LTTE for its intransigence." 
 
"Referring to Anton Balasingham's letter to Prime Minister 
Ranil Wickremesinghe, Mr. Wills observes: "letter makes it 
sound like it was only the mismanagement of previous 
Colombo Governments that impoverished the south of Sri 
Lanka, and that the devastation of the north and east is 
all government fault. That's ludicrous. Successive 
governments have made many mistakes, but if blame is being 
distributed fairly, the LTTE deserves a great deal as well. 
Its pursuit of an extreme separatist agenda, by violent 
means, has severely affected not only the north and east, 
but the rest of Sri Lanka too." 
 
"The forthright interview given by Ambassador Wills to 
Reuters need not be taken by the Tigers as a loss of face, 
but is a reflection of increasing loss of patience by the 
international community and particularly USA over the 
LTTE's shrewd manoeuvrings. We hope it will serve as a 
timely warning to the LTTE. Mr. Prabhakaran holed up in 
tiny Wanni should think twice before he turns his back on 
this friendly advice from the US envoy." 
 
"It should especially reflect on the following lines of Mr. 
Wills: "While the talks are suspended, we urge the LTTE to 
reflect carefully on its own transgressions. Assassinations 
of opponents, intimidation of Muslims, taxation without 
representation, aggressive Sea Tiger behaviour and 
continued child recruitment do not build trust in the 
LTTE's intentions.'" 
 
***** Typically skeptical opposition English daily ISLAND, 
and weekly ISLAND SUNDAY offered editorial comment on 4/26 
and 4/27.  Under the 4/26 headline, "Hard talk can do more 
than dollars" the ISLAND notes, "Had western nations read 
the riot act to the LTTE on terrorism much earlier, the 
history of Sri Lanka would have taken a different course 
years ago."  Excerpts: 
"American Ambassador, Ashley Wills did some much needed 
plain hard talking in his interview with Reuters on the 
decision of the LTTE to suspend peace negotiations with the 
government." 
"This straight from the shoulder stuff was much needed 
because in the convoluted rigmarole of the LTTE spokesman, 
Balasingham, to Prime Minister Ranil Wickremasinghe 
announcing the decision to suspend participation, an 
attempt was made to project that the LTTE was the aggrieved 
party, sweeping under the carpet, their belligerency and 
terrorism that took place, even while the Ceasefire 
Agreement was in force." 
"If Prabakaran, Balasingham and their cronies had thought 
that they could twist the arm of the Americans and other 
western powers with blackmail of suspending negotiations, 
these words of Ashley Wills, a resounding slap, was the 
answer. But this is not enough." 
"Neither the Sri Lanka government nor the western powers 
involved in the peace process should yield to this 
blackmail of the LTTE. If the LTTE walks out of the 
negotiations, they do so knowing well that they place at 
stake international assistance very much needed to 
resurrect the war ravaged areas of the north and east as 
well as alleviating the suffering of the Tamils in these 
areas." 
"It is evident that only the western nations where the ex- 
patriate Tamil community makes a living and sends money to 
the LTTE war chest that can make the LTTE do their bidding. 
Had western nations read the riot act to the LTTE on 
terrorism much earlier, the history of Sri Lanka would have 
taken a different course years ago." 
"Plain hard talk by other western ambassadors could help 
this country much more than the millions of dollars they 
are willing to part with." 
 
***** The Opposition English weekly ISLAND SUNDAY continued 
on (4/27),  "Call the LTTE bluff"  that  if the LTTE  stays 
out of the peace talks, it "must realise and act on. that 
while all Lankans will be losers in such an event, the 
Tamils in the war-scarred northeast will be the biggest 
losers."  Excerpts: 
"It's time to call the LTTE's bluff. U.S. Ambassador Ashley 
Wills made clear as early as April 2 that the Tigers, as 
members of a foreign terrorist organisation (FTO), will not 
be invited to the Washington meeting earlier this month to 
prepare for the major donor confab in Tokyo next June..." 
"The LTTE must understand that threatening to sabotage the 
Tokyo meeting, undoubtedly with the intention of extracting 
some other concession, possibly something on the naval 
front given the most pressing issue of the moment, as an 
inducement to persuade them to attend, is not in the 
interest of Sri Lanka and most so not in the interest of 
the Tamil people of the north and the east that they claim 
to represent. If the Tokyo meeting is scuttled or postponed 
that means that there will be no international money 
quickly forthcoming to press on with the urgent task of 
undoing the ravages of the war" 
"The country desperately needs the money that will surely 
flow after the Tokyo meeting and the Tigers know this well. 
That is why they are trying to maximize the possibilities 
of the current scene resorting to the gun-at-the-head 
tactic. Colombo must not capitulate. The LTTE has for too 
long worn a look of injured innocence which Ambassador 
Wills tellingly exposed last week with some refreshing 
plain speak." 
"Uncertainty on whether the Tokyo meeting will be held as 
scheduled in June or not will definitely affect high level 
participation. More importantly, international confidence 
in the likelihood of a honourable and durable peace being 
achieved in Sri Lanka will be seriously undermined. What 
the LTTE must realise and act on is that while all Lankans 
will be losers in such an event, the Tamils in the war- 
scarred northeast will be the biggest losers. So Russian 
roulette of the sort that is now being played is not the 
best route to the desired objective." 
 
***** Under the headline, "International community's 
gesture," government-owned Sinhala Daily DINAMINA comments 
(4/26) that because of the LTTE suspension of talks ".the 
international community and the opposition have come to 
agree on the peace process with the Sri Lankan Government." 
Excerpts: 
 
"There is a silver lining in every dark cloud. The silver 
lining in the dark clouds created by LTTE's pulling out of 
peace talks is now showing... The opposition had no clear 
idea about the peace process... there were different views 
on this and the LTTE... The general opinion of the 
opposition on the peace process was never a clear one..." 
 
"But, no sooner LTTE pulling out was announced the 
opposition unanimously decided that negotiations should 
occur... The united opposition's standpoint that 'peace 
talks should continue' is a positive factor. 
...International community is pressurizing the LTTE on 
this...US, India and France...." 
 
"US Ambassador on the 24th has said that LTTE, should come 
to the negotiations table if they genuinely represent 
Tamils and that their facts are just magnified and 
unacceptable... US Ambassador has also pointed out that SLG 
alone should not be blamed for the violations of MOU.... He 
has strongly criticized some LTTE acts... North east 
destruction has been caused by Sri Lankan governments as 
well as LTTE and he has emphasized that LTTE must return to 
peace talks..." 
 
"Meanwhile, America stresses that LTTE should renounce 
terrorism by word and deed. the international community led 
by America says that Sri Lanka should be a democratic and 
united country and no single ethnicity should be penalised. 
This shows the irrelevance of the anti peace groups' 
calling the peace process an attempt to divide the 
country." 
 
"With this decision of the LTTE, the international 
community and the opposition have come to agree on the 
peace process with the SLG.  These silver linings on the 
dark clouds should be considered as blessings... all 
parties should dedicate themselves to peace... then our 
dream will be realized.." 
 
 
***** Under the headline, "LTTE cannot boycott 
negotiations," independent Sinhala weekly LAKBIMA comments 
that with the involvement of the international community, 
"Sri Lanka's peace or war is not managed solely by Colombo 
or Wanni."  Excerpts: 
 
"It is very important for LTTE to attend negotiations... 
but they show as if it is of no importance to them... State 
media also showed that it is the SLG that would lose if 
Tigers pulled out from talks... But the public although 
hard-bitten by the previous wars was not shaken. They knew 
that LTTE cannot boycott talks..." 
 
"This was the exact statement of the US Ambassador Ashley 
Wills... he said that their reasoning was not acceptable 
and that they have attend talks...he stressed on the 
importance of their coming to Tokyo peace talks... listed 
child abductions, intimidation of Muslims......and said 
that this behavior would not help build confidence on 
tigers .... That the international community would respect 
them if they renounced terrorism..." 
 
"Earlier, efforts were made to get the international 
community in between the Sri Lankan government and the 
LTTE... now not only they are here but they offer to advise 
and guide if one party detours... we are not in a position 
to blame anyone... this is what we have created... As we 
once said, Sri Lanka's peace or war is not managed solely 
by Colombo or Wanni" 
 
 
 
***** Under the headline, "'Sri Lankan Government and 
opposition agree on a solution through negotiations," 
government-owned Sinhala weekly SILUMINA comments  (4/27): 
"[the LTTE]  cannot opt for war as the Sri Lankan 
Government has kept the international community abreast of 
the real situation...." Excerpts: 
 
"...Several groups were blaming the peace process saying 
that it attempts to divide the country... people in the 
North as well as the international community push LTTE 
towards peace... many analysts believe that this pulling 
out is just in order to win some of their demands.....But 
they cannot opt for war as SLG has kept the international 
community abreast of the real situation...." 
 
"Analyzing the facts listed by LTTE, the American 
Ambassador says that they are not acceptable... while 
accepting the mistakes of SLG, he has pointed out the 
serious violations of MOU by LTTE. But when terrorist 
organizations opt for peace serious incidents can be 
expected." 
 
"Without acting as opportunists, we all must realize tat 
this we have come to a decisive point where we all should 
solve this national crisis...." 
 
***** Under the headline, "Appreciating the American 
Ambassador's statement," independent Sinhala daily 
LANKADEEPA, commented (4/28), "the Tigers who call 
themselves genuine representatives of the Tamils should try 
and let these people reap peace benefits by returning to 
peace talks."  Excerpts: 
 
"LTTE before asking the Sri Lankan government about its 
good response to MOU conditions should ask themselves 
whether their response to same had been positive... Can 
they point their fingers at somebody else?  SLMM itself has 
said that LTTE had more violations on their account... As 
Mr. Wills very correctly points out SLG alone should not be 
blamed for violations of MOU..." 
 
"Ambassador Wills has given an excellent response to the 
resettlement issues and its slow progress... he said that 
"Expectations on development in the 
south as well as the north are very high... All Sri Lankans 
should understand economic development takes time and it 
would accelerate only in lasting peace; Sri Lanka has not 
yet achieved that... And he further said that lasting peace 
can only be achieved by attending the peace talks and not 
by walking away from it... We too agree that Tigers should 
know the importance of sticking to the peace talks and 
discussing the issues faced by both parties..." 
 
"The fact that Tiger reasoning is not acceptable and blown 
up... If lasting peace is achieved, highest benefits of 
peace would be enjoyed by the suffering communities in the 
north... The Tigers who call themselves genuine 
representatives of the Tamils should try and let these 
people reap peace benefits by returning to peace talks..." 
 
***** Under the headline, "US Ambassador's request," 
Independent Tamil daily, VIRAKESARI (4/26) comments, "the 
talks should continue with commitment for the sake of peace 
and its benefits. In the meantime, the Government should 
implement the decisions taken at the previous talks." 
Excerpts: 
 
"US Ambassador Ashley Wills has requested the Tiger 
Organization to reverse its decision and to participate at 
talks for the welfare of the Tamils." 
 
"Many including the President, Opposition Leader, JVP and 
Sihala Urumaya criticized the LTTE pull out and Sihala 
Urumaya called for the immediate commencement of the war." 
 
"Internationally there were comments and VIP's of many 
countries including US and India had requested not to break 
talks." 
 
"US Ambassador Ashley Wills has given his complete views. 
He stated that he regretted the decision of the Tigers and 
that they should review their decision and to attend 
talks..It is not possible to rebuild a country that is 
economically devastated in no time. North and East of Sri 
Lanka are awaiting much economic development." 
 
"All the Sri Lankan governments are responsible for the 
fate of North and East. US Ambassador stated that Tigers 
are also responsible for the present economic position in 
N&E. He said that Rome was not built in a day. Likewise it 
is not possible to rebuild Kilinochchi or Trinco within a 
day." 
 
"It should be noted that there were many good results. 
Therefore, the talks should continue with commitment for 
the sake of peace and its benefits. In the meantime, the 
Government should implement the decisions taken at the 
previous talks." 
 
***** Under the headline, "Talks must continue" independent 
Tamil daily, THINAKKURAL comments (4/26), "From all corners 
pressure is building up to commence the peace talks again." 
Excerpts: 
 
"No one needs to say that the ceasefire agreement is 
broken. Necessity to put the peace program on correct track 
is the order of the temporary suspension of talks. From all 
corners pressure is building up to commence the peace talks 
again." 
 
"Liberation Tigers should not pull out of talks. They 
should attend the Tokyo 
Aid Conference. The decision to boycott the Tokyo Aid 
Conference was regrettable. The Tigers want to be treated 
respectfully. My government understands that, said the US 
Ambassador Ashley Wills, which is the US stand." 
 
"Not only the US Ambassador but also the US Deputy 
Secretary of State Richard Armitage have expressed their 
 
SIPDIS 
views that the US government will not hesitate to lift the 
ban on LTTE and accept them as a political group if they 
renounce violence." 
 
"The decision of the Liberation Tigers to pull out 
temporarily from talks is appropriate. Thereafter they were 
to boycott the SIHRN Sub Committee meeting 
in Kilinochchi, which was to be attended by the government 
officials and the 
Norwegian diplomats..." 
 
----- 
Opinion 
----- 
¶4. ***** Under the headline, "Sound and fury and little 
else," independent English weekly, Sunday Times' political 
editor wrote, "Uncle Ashley Wills let [the LTTE] have it in 
his interview with Reuters."  Excerpts: 
 
"..Others, however, have a different view. They argue that 
foreign policy has never been the LTTE's forte, and by 
taking on the United States of America by criticising them 
for being left out of the Washington aid talks last week, 
they were taken up by the bold resistance of possibly, the 
Iraqi Baath Party." 
"They invited trouble from Uncle Sam, and Uncle Ashly Wills 
let them have it in his interview with Reuters. Lest the 
Sri Lankan yakkos missed the US ambassador's comments, the 
US embassy in Colombo circulated the full text to the local 
media." 
 
"And now, Anton Balasingham has responded with an interview 
to Tamilnet and the LTTE has now got entangled with the US, 
and one wonders whether the fate of Tareq Aziz would befall 
Anton Balasingham. Surely not." 
***** Government-owned English DAILY NEWS (4/26), headlined 
its opinion page. "Way out of ethnic conflict is through 
negotiations - US Envoy"  and printed the full text of the 
Ambassador's Reuters interview. 
***** Government-owned English weekly, Sunday Observer 
(4/27) ran "US ambassador's reaction to LTTE suspension of 
peace talks : 'time for fighting has long passed'" on its 
opinion page and included significant portions of the 
Ambassador's interview. 
***** Under the headline, "None of that crap, Bala" 
typically skeptical opposition English weekly, ISLAND 
SUNDAY opinion writer agrees with Ambassador Wills' 
statements, noting "Forgive us, but that sounds kind of 
right." (4/27). Excerpts: 
 
"But let's stop the nit-picking, shall we. (For the benefit 
of those who haven't been following our peace process 
closely, any criticism of the LTTE is nit-picking and 
betrays a shallow mind and supremely immature outlook)." 
"US Ambassador Ashley Wills in a Reuters interview last 
week aptly summarised the (long?) list of LTTE 
transgressions. "Assassinations of opponents, intimidation 
of Muslims, taxation without representation, aggressive Sea 
Tiger behaviour and continued child recruitment," he 
enumerated." 
"Humph. Immature, nit-picking AMERICAN. Don't you think, 
Bala?" 
"But the international community is not pleased. Oh no. To 
quote that American again, "A well-intentioned party that 
truly wants a peaceful, political settlement to Sri Lanka's 
conflict could deal with such grievances at the negotiating 
table". Forgive us, but that sounds kind of right." 
 
***** Under the headline "Economic growth dependent on 
political and military stability," Pro-UNP English weekly, 
SUNDAY LEADER (4/27), offered more opinion.  Excerpts: 
 
"...And the big boys in the world scene were telling the 
LTTE, diplomatically, that they were not willing to play 
ball and the status quo remained. However, the biggest 
boost to the government and the biggest snub to the LTTE 
came from the US. "We don't find them (LTTE) convincing. A 
well-intentioned party that truly wants a peaceful, 
political settlement to Sri Lanka's conflict could deal 
with such grievances at the negotiating table," Ambassador 
Ashley Wills said last week... The Americans would create 
most pressure for the LTTE. Most observers believe that if 
the Tigers stick to their guns of insisting that they 
boycott the Tokyo meeting, the US is very likely to exert 
pressure." 
 
Wills