This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/AN/IAA, IO/UNP, AND USUN 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR ETRD CU HO UNGA
SUBJECT: HONDURAN AMBASSADOR TO CUBA NOT IN THE OFFING, BUT 
MFA SUGGESTS ONE COULD AID HUMAN RIGHTS EFFORTS 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2490 
 
     ¶B. STATE 297777 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request; see paragraph 6. 
 
¶2. (U) Deputy Chief of Mission and Political Counselor met 
with Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs Anibel Quinones on 
October 28 to deliver points in ref B.  Quinones was already 
aware of USG concerns as raised with Government of Honduras 
(GOH) officials in ref A.  Quinones added Ambassador 
Canahuati had also informed MFA that State Department 
officials had raised the issue during the Honduran Minister 
of Public Security's visit to Washington during the previous 
week. 
 
¶3. (C) Quinones reiterated that the naming of a Honduran 
ambassador to Cuba is not on the immediate agenda of the 
Foreign Ministry, nor have they have had any recent 
discussion with the President's office on the topic.  He did 
echo earlier comments (see ref A) that the GOH is concerned 
about being able to provide consular services to its 700 
Honduran nationals who are studying medicine there.  He also 
added a new wrinkle, suggesting that the GOH is concerned 
about the possible political indoctrination of these medical 
students and needs to expand staffing at their offices in 
Cuba to monitor better the type of training these students 
may be receiving. 
 
¶4. (C) Quinones stated that at some point Honduras would have 
to name an ambassador.  He said that they have not received 
any pressure from the Cuban Ambassador in Tegucigalpa nor has 
there been recent domestic pressure, which has allowed them 
to move slowly.  He explained, however, that the conclusion 
and signing of a maritime boundary treaty with Cuba is a top 
priority for the GOH, in part, he claimed, because it will 
strengthen their defense against Nicaragua's maritime border 
case in The Hague.  He added that the GOH is close to 
finishing a similar agreement with Mexico and they signed an 
agreement with the Cayman Islands and the United Kingdom in 
¶2002.  The agreement with Cuba, we learned separately, is 
completed.  All that is lacking is a signing ceremony. 
 
¶5. (C) Quinones then asked if he could speculate on a 
possible course of action that might serve both countries, 
interests.  He first made clear that this approach had not 
been discussed with either President Maduro or Foreign 
Minister Rosa Bautista.  As a member of the UN Commission on 
Human Rights, he said, Honduras felt it was positioned to 
play a key role in advancing the international effort to 
press Cuba to live up to its international human rights 
commitments.  Quinones said that Honduras wanted to use its 
time on the UNCHR to promote human rights in the hemisphere. 
He asked directly whether it would be helpful to the U.S. to 
have a loyal ally in Havana who could help press the human 
rights case there.  He noted that the current chief of the 
U.S. Interests Section, Jim Cason, was favorably known to the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs from his earlier posting here, 
and imagined that he would be comfortable working closely 
with the Honduran mission.  Quinones then suggested that the 
MFA would seek to name a senior career Honduran diplomat to 
the Charge post in Havana.  He said this would give Honduras 
the necessary level of experienced representation to meet its 
consular needs and a seasoned official who could engage more 
effectively on human rights issues in Cuba.  He added that it 
would also delay the need for naming an ambassador.  Another 
option that he said had been discussed would be to dually 
accredit a Honduran Ambassador in another country to Cuba, 
although this was not an attractive option. 
 
¶6. (C) COMMENT:  Quinones at one point made it clear that the 
GOH and MFA are unhappy with the current Charge in Havana and 
wanted to replace him with a more experienced officer.  It 
appears that they will not be naming an ambassador in the 
immediate future but are considering ways to upgrade the 
level of representation in Havana.  While the GOH,s concern 
about its consular services is laudable, we believe that the 
GOH is most concerned about finalizing its maritime boundary 
treaty with Cuba.  Post would appreciate department and US 
Interest Section Havana's guidance on how to respond to 
Quinones,s idea about the appointment of a more senior MFA 
official in the Charge role and interest in working with US 
on human rights issues.  END COMMENT. 
 
Palmer