This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (FOR JWALLER); SA/PAB SA/RA (FOR SCENSNY) 
SA/PD LJIRWIN, WREINCKENS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE LTTE
SUBJECT: MEDIA PLAY: AMBASSADOR WILLS VISITS JAFFNA 
 
REF: COLOMBO 421 
 
¶1. Ambassador Wills' 3/11 visit to Jaffna (see reftel) was 
noted in segments of the English and Sinhala press, and 
garnered substantial and positive coverage in the Tamil 
press. 
 
¶2. English and Sinhala dailies.  Under the front-page 
headline "Wills says 'peace at hand'" the DAILY MIRROR 
(independent English daily) said:  "U.S. Ambassador Ashley 
Wills yesterday urged the Jaffna People to be calm and 
patient till next year to witness lasting peace and 
economic growth.  The ambassador made this appeal when he 
met officials of local NGOs.  Mr. Wills was also scheduled 
to meet Jaffna military commander Sarath Fonseka to discuss 
the issue of High Security Zones."  Similar coverage 
appeared on the front page of DINAMINA (government-owned 
Sinhala daily) under the headline "'Dawn of peace is 
certain; people in the North should wait patiently' -- 
American Ambassador says in Jaffna."  Excerpts:  "... Wills 
said that Sri Lanka would have eternal peace through the 
current peace process....  He expressed this view at a 
conference [attended by] Jaffna MPs and NGO officials.  The 
Ambassador said that peace that would be ushered in before 
the end of this year ... and that the country would then 
reap more of the benefits of peace."  DINAMINA noted that 
other issues discussed included "creating a conducive 
environment for civilians to resettle in the HSZs, fishing 
activities, and farmers' and media issues...." 
 
¶3. Tamil coverage.  Understandably, coverage was heaviest 
in the Tamil press.  Excerpts follow: 
 
- SUDAR OLI (independent Tamil daily):  At the meeting MPs 
and other representatives explained to him the living 
standards of the Jaffna people, HSZs issues, and problems 
surrounding the resettlement of IDPs.  "Although one year 
has passed since the signing of the MOU, normalcy has not 
returned to Jaffna and its people," [local leaders] said. 
They also said that "fishermen are affected very badly. 
Our golden lands have been turned into HSZs and our people 
are denied their resettlement and farming rights....  When 
the guns are silent are these HSZs necessary?" 
 
In reply, the Ambassador said:  "Government is facing 
problems in resettlement.  I am telling you that the HSZs 
will be removed step by step and the displaced will be 
resettled.  Therefore the people should be a bit patient. 
 
- THINAKURAL (independent Tamil daily):  ... Wills said as 
the peace talks between the Government and the Liberation 
Tigers progress, HSZs will be removed, normalcy will 
return, and people will begin to resettle.  He further 
stated:  "Permanent peace will return only if the Tamil 
people of the North and East are patient.  It is impossible 
to find an immediate solution to a problem that has existed 
for 20 years.  This can only be achieved step by step.  For 
this the government and the Liberation Tigers should work 
together." 
 
- THINAKARAN (government-owned Tamil daily):  "There is 
fervent hope that Sri Lanka will achieve lasting peace -- 
People of Jaffna should be patient" said Ambassador Ashley 
Wills....  He also said that the people should see more 
benefits in the second year of the ceasefire agreement." 
 
Wills