This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 001649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR MARCELLA CROMEENES, LANL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NL KSCA ENRG TRGY OTRA
SUBJECT: NETHERLANDS CTRY CLR. GRANTED  BOISSEVAIN + 0, 
(07/16/2003 - 07/25/2003) 
 
REF: SECSTATE 181230 
 
   ¶1.  (U) Country Clearance is granted for Jan G. Boissevain 
for travel to The Netherlands July 16 - July 25,2003. 
 
¶2.  (U) Embassy understands that no assistance is requested. 
 
 
SECURITY ADVISORY: 
 
¶3.  (U) Post provides the following threat assessment for The 
Netherlands: The Department of State on April 21, 2003 issued 
a worldwide caution to alert Americans of the need to remain 
vigilant.  The Department of State reminds Americans that 
tensions remaining from the recent events in Iraq may 
increase the potential threat to U.S. citizens and interests 
abroad, including by terrorist groups.  Terrorist actions may 
include, but are not limited to: suicide operations, bombings 
or kidnappings.  Possible threats include conventional 
weapons such as explosive devices or non-conventional 
weapons, including chemical or biological agents.  Terrorists 
do not distinguish between official and civilian targets. 
These may include facilities where American citizens and 
other foreigners congregate or visit, such as residential 
areas, clubs restaurants, places of worship, schools, hotels, 
outdoor recreation events or resorts and beaches.  If 
facilities cannot be avoided, U.S. citizens should increase 
their security awareness at such locations.  Please consult 
the Department's web site for text: http://travel.state.gov. 
In light of this caution all visitors to The Netherlands are 
encouraged to assess their security posture and be alert to 
their surroundings for possible surveillance.  All visitors 
should exercise caution while traveling abroad, as U.S. 
citizens and facilities are often the target of groups 
demonstrating opposition to U.S. foreign policy. 
 
¶4.  (U) A major concern for visitors is crime.  Most crimes 
against official Americans are limited to pick-pocketing and 
luggage theft.  However, burglary, vandalism to automobiles, 
and theft from hotel rooms are not unknown.  Recently, theft 
of laptop computers has increased, especially at Schiphol 
airport and major train stations.  The thieves operate in 
small groups, are determined and well practiced at 
distraction theft.  Several official travelers have been 
victimized lately, losing personal and unclassified 
government computers, valuable software and data. 
Regulations require the use of the diplomatic pouch for 
shipment of classified equipment and information. 
 
¶5.  (U) Streets can be walked in relative safety, but as in 
any U.S. urban city, the same amount of caution should be 
exercised after dark in the more populated cities of The 
Hague, Amsterdam, and Rotterdam. Red-light districts and 
public transportation hubs are common locations for incidents 
of street crime. 
SOBEL