This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002033 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR OTRA NL
SUBJECT: TRAVEL CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR FAA PERSONNEL E.O. 
12958: N/A TAGS: EAIR OTRA NL
NORTHWEST AIRLINES CERTIFICATE 
 
REF: DES PLAINE 130414Z 
 
 
¶1.  Country clearance is granted for Joseph Eugene Masini for 
travel to the Netherlands August 17 - August 23, 2003. 
 
¶2.  Embassy understands that no assistance is requested. 
Please note that the country clearance request cable was not 
received in Amsterdam Consulate or Embassy The Hague. 
Please send all country clearances to The Hague and not 
Amsterdam. 
 
POST ACCESS: 
 
¶3.  Visitors who need unescorted access into secure areas of 
the Mission must include the fact that he/she has at least a 
secret level clearance in the country clearance request.  The 
 
SIPDIS 
cable should include SSN, and the name of the agency granting 
the clearance.  Cables MUST include the ASEC Tag to ensure 
distribution to the RSO Office. 
 
COMPUTER and ELECTRONICS USAGE: 
 
¶4.  Inter-agency security standards prohibit the introduction 
or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software at all 
USG diplomatic facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all 
secure areas of the Mission. 
 
¶5.  Travelers who anticipate having special needs in terms of 
either access or computer usage should contact the RSO 
Office. 
 
SECURITY ADVISORY: 
 
¶6.  Post provides the following threat assessment for The 
Netherlands: The Department of State on July 29, 2003 issued 
a worldwide caution to alert Americans of the need to remain 
vigilant.  The Department of State reminds U.S. citizens of 
the continuing threat of terrorist actions that may target 
U.S. citizens and to update these potential threats.  The 
U.S. Government remains deeply concerned about the security 
of U.S. citizens overseas.  U.S. citizens are cautioned to 
maintain a high level of vigilance, to remain alert and to 
take appropriate steps to increase their security awareness. 
 
¶7.  Tensions remaining from the recent events in Iraq may 
increase the potential threat to U.S. citizens and interests 
abroad, by terrorist and other groups.  Terrorist actions may 
include, but are not limited to, suicide operations, 
hijackings, bombings or kidnappings.  These may also involve 
commercial aircraft.  Other potential threats include 
conventional weapons, such as explosive devices, or 
non-conventional weapons, such as chemical or biological 
agents. Terrorists do not distinguish between official and 
civilian targets.  These may include facilities where 
American citizens and other foreigners congregate or visit, 
including residential areas, clubs, restaurants, places of 
worship, schools, hotels, outdoor recreation events or 
resorts and beaches. U.S. citizens should remain in a 
heightened state of personal security awareness when 
attendance at such locations is unavoidable.  Please consult 
the Department's web site for text: http://travel.state.gov. 
In light of this caution all visitors to The Netherlands are 
encouraged to assess their security posture and be alert and 
be alert to their surroundings for possible surveillance. 
All visitors should exercise caution while traveling abroad, 
as U.S. citizens and facilities are often the target of 
groups demonstrating opposition to U.S. foreign policy. 
 
¶8.  A concern for visitors is crime.  Most crimes against 
official Americans are limited to pick-pocketing and luggage 
theft.  Vandalism to and theft from automobiles and hotel 
rooms are not unknown.  Recently, theft of laptop computers 
has increased, especially at Schiphol Airport and major train 
stations.  The thieves operate in small groups that target 
travelers, are determined and well practiced at distraction 
theft.  Several official travelers have been victimized 
lately, losing personal and unclassified government 
computers, valuable software and data.  Travelers are 
reminded regulations require the use of the diplomatic pouch 
for shipment of classified equipment and information. 
 
¶9. Streets can be walked in relative safety, but as in any 
U.S. urban area, caution should be exercised after dark in 
the more populated cities of The Hague, Amsterdam and 
Rotterdam. Red-light districts and public transportation hubs 
are common locations for incidents of street crime. 
SOBEL