This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000767 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL ADCO ADPM YM
SUBJECT: FM QIRBI ON THE DIPLOMATIC POUCH, EMBASSY 
VEHICLES, AND NON-DIPLOMATIC PLATES 
 
REF: SANAA 339 
 
Classified By: Edmund J. Hull, Ambassador for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  Ambassador and Foreign Minister Abu Bakr 
al-Qirbi discussed problems plaguing the diplomatic pouch, 
outstanding vehicle exemption requests and the shortage of 
non-diplomatic "blue" license plates during an April 12 
meeting on various subjects (septels).  Ambassador criticized 
the lack of ROYG consistency and stressed the need for a 
swift resolution to avoid wider ramifications.  FM Qirbi 
agreed to contact his ROYG counterparts to get these issues 
resolved.  End summary. 
 
---------------- 
Diplomatic Pouch 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Ambassador highlighted the latest diplomatic pouch 
run on April 11 as another example of ROYG inconsistency.  He 
noted that post did everything ROYG requested and even sent 
people to the airport on 4/10 to make sure preparations were 
complete.  Regardless, there were still new requirements on 
April 11 when the pouches arrived.  Ambassador added that 
post now faces a situation that will require even larger 
shipments just to catch-up with the backlog. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Noting that this impasse is continuing to draw 
attention in Washington, Ambassador delivered a non-paper 
outlining an April 4th incident in which diplomatic couriers 
were physically prevented from performing their duties -- one 
sustaining minor injuries while trying to maintain possession 
of the pouch. 
 
¶4.  (C)  After hearing the details of the April 4th incident, 
FM Qirbi said he would raise the issue during a meeting with 
PSO Chief Gamish scheduled for later that afternoon (4/12). 
 
------------------- 
Vehicle Exemptions 
------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Ambassador called FM Qirbi's attention to four 
pending vehicle exemptions at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, all of which are for armored vehicles.  Ambassador 
highlighted the Embassy's need for additional armored 
vehicles to maintain a strong security posture, and advised 
that, due in part to the Embassy's growth because of 
increased U.S.-Yemen cooperation, additional vehicle 
exemption requests for both armored and personal vehicles 
would be forthcoming.  Qirbi acknowledged the importance of 
maintaining security, but made no commitment to streamline 
the process. 
 
--------------------- 
"Blue" License Plates 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  When discussion turned to the shortage of blue 
(non-diplomatic) license plates, FM Qirbi immediately denied 
MFA involvement in their issuance.  Ambassador countered that 
the Ministry of Interior, the only other player in the 
process, said that the MOI has no objection to the release of 
these plates, the implication being that unresolved problems 
were to be dealt with by the MFA. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Qirbi replied that he would raise this issue with 
the Minister of Interior later that day (4/12).  The 
Ambassador welcomed Qirbi's involvement and added that the 
Embassy is trying to help ROYG by making U.S. officials 
harder targets -- by removing easily identifiable diplomatic 
plates and replacing them with regular blue plates. 
 
HULL