This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/UBI, EUR/RPM, PM/RSAT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/28/2013 
TAGS: MOPS MARR KPKO PREL PGOV NL LI AF IZ BK
SUBJECT: STATUS OF DUTCH MILITARY DEPLOYMENTS:  LIBERIA, 
AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ AND BOSNIA 
 
REF: A. THE HAGUE 2299 (NOTAL) 
     ¶B. THE HAGUE 2343 (NOTAL) 
     ¶C. STATE 302820 (NOTAL) 
     ¶D. STATE 283779 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY ACTING POLITICAL COUNSELOR NATHANIEL DEAN 
FOR REASONS 1.5 (B AND D). 
 
 ¶1. (S) Summary:  Acting PolCouns met with the Dutch MFA 
Security Policy Bureau Operations Chief Rob Gabrielse 
(protect throughout) on October 29 to review the status of 
current and planned Dutch participation in international 
military operations in Liberia, Afghanistan, Iraq and Bosnia. 
 On Liberia, Gabrielse confirmed that the GONL planned to 
dispatch the Dutch Navy's Landing Platform, Dock (LPD) Hr.Ms. 
Rotterdam to participate in UN operations in Liberia (UNMIL). 
 Gabrielse said the GONL continues to consider possible 
further involvement on the ground in Afghanistan, to include 
potential deployment of special operations force (SOF) in 
support of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF), takeover of 
operations at Kabul International Airport or participation in 
the German-led Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) at 
Konduz.  The GONL believes its deployment to Al Muthanna 
province in Iraq as part of the UK division has been 
successful to date, and anticipates approval of a six-month 
extension of the deployment in November.  Acting PolCouns 
conveyed previously requested information concerning a U.S. 
request for deployment of Dutch Explosive Ordnance Disposal 
(EOD) assets in Iraq.  On Bosnia, Gabrielse said while the 
Dutch support an eventual EU takeover of the NATO SFOR 
mission, they have no plans to reduce their forces out of 
step with allies, believe any EU takeover must be done in 
line with full NATO-EU consultations.  End Summary. 
 
------- 
Liberia 
------- 
 
¶2. (C) Gabrielse confirmed that the GONL had decided on 
October 24 to deploy the Dutch Navy's LPD, Hr.Ms. Rotterdam 
for three months in support of UNMIL.  The Rotterdam includes 
hospital and water purification facilities, a platoon of 
marines for security and two Lynx helicopters.  The Rotterdam 
is expected to arrive off Liberia in mid-November and will 
transport goods, vehicles and, if necessary, troops from 
Monrovia to Buchanan and Harper, as well as supplying 
drinking water to UN staff and personnel.  The Dutch 
parliament will review the deployment during the week of 
November 3.  Gabrielse anticipated no significant 
parliamentary problems in view of the support of the main 
opposition Labor party for the deployment.  The 
second-largest coalition partner, the Liberals, have 
expressed skepticism about the mission owing to perceived 
lack of involvement from other major western countries and 
possible overstretch of Dutch forces.  Comment:  Post shares 
Gabrielse's view that the deployment will go forward as 
planned.  End Comment. 
 
----------- 
Afghanistan 
----------- 
 
¶3. (C) The GONL continues to review options for a possible on 
the ground Dutch presence in Afghanistan.  Following the 
conclusion of their co-lead role of ISAF III with Germany on 
August 11, the Dutch have maintained a residual presence of 
35 personnel in the ISAF IV Headquarters.  The Dutch Air 
Force concluded its F-16 deployment with the European 
Participating Air Force (EPAF) detachment flying out of 
Manas, Kyrgystan in support of OEF on October 1.  Gabrielse 
said there is still a high level of determination in MFA to 
do more on the ground in Afghanistan.  Defense Minister Kamp, 
who has had to cope with severe budget cutbacks, has been 
more skeptical.  Gabrielse outlined three possible options: 
the Dutch would deploy a small contingent of SOF in support 
of OEF, the Dutch would take over operation of Kabul 
International Airport or the Dutch would deploy personnel 
with the German-led PRT at Konduz.  The Dutch government has 
been reviewing possible deployment of SOF in support of OEF 
for more than a year.  As reported ref B, the military is 
enthusiastic about such a deployment, but the leadership of 
MOD and MFA are concerned about potential domestic political 
ramifications of Dutch SOF apprehending Taliban/Al Qaeda 
members that may then be detained at Guantanamo Bay. 
Regarding Kabul Airport, Gabrielse noted this was a request 
from NATO and said that since no ally had taken it up to 
date, the Dutch might take over the mission.  That said, MOD 
had warned MFA that experts necessary for this mission might 
not be quickly available.  Dutch participation in the 
German-led PRT at Konduz has until recently been the 
preferred political option for Ministers, though there are 
strong arguments in support of the former two possibilities. 
Gabrielse expected some sort of decision on further Dutch 
involvement in Afghanistan in November. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶4. (S) To date, the GONL believes its deployment of 1100 
personnel (mostly Dutch marines) to Al Muthanna Province as 
part of the UK division conducting stabilization operations 
has gone well.  Hostile incidents have been few, and the 
Dutch have conducted successful operations to seize weapons 
such as a recent episode where Dutch marines and military 
police concealed in local taxis disrupted a weapons selling 
operation in As Samawah, which resulted in the arrest of 82 
individuals.  The leadership of the Dutch parliament's 
foreign policy and defense committees is presently on a visit 
to the Dutch sector in Iraq.  Gabrielse anticipated the GONL 
would take a decision extending the deployment of the Dutch 
contingent by six months after the parliamentarians return. 
Gabrielse said that the GONL is in active discussions with 
the Japanese government (GOJ) about the possible deployment 
of Ground Self Defense Forces (GSDF) personnel to the Dutch 
sector.  Gabrielse said a GOJ survey team had a successful 
visit to the Dutch sector in September and he expected a GOJ 
decision in November on the deployment.  Acting PolCouns 
conveyed background information as provided ref C on 
Explosive Ordnance Disposal further to U.S. request for 
deployment of Dutch EOD assets to Al Muthanna (ref D). 
Gabrielse expressed appreciation for the additional 
information, but made no additional comment about possible a 
Dutch EOD deployment. 
 
------ 
Bosnia 
------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Concerning Bosnia, the other major Dutch overseas 
deployment (the Dutch have 1100 troops serving in SFOR) 
Gabrielse said the Dutch had no plans to reduce forces out of 
step with other allies.  The GONL favors an eventual takeover 
of the SFOR mission by the EU, but believes this should 
depend on developments on the ground, the position of the 
Bosnian government and extensive NATO-EU discussions. 
SOBEL