This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

170941Z Dec 03C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 008237 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS MASS IZ JO
SUBJECT: CT TRAINING PROGRAM FOR IRAQ 
 
REF: AMMAN 8071 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Jordan's King Abdullah and U.S. Brigadier General 
Harrell (Special Operations Command, Central) signed an 
agreement December 15 for Jordan to provide counter-terrorism 
training for Iraqi forces with U.S. support.  The agreement 
provides for counter-terrorism training for Iraqi recruits, 
to occur in Jordan.  Four consecutive twelve-week training 
classes are planned.  The first group of approximately two 
hundred trainees will arrive in late December, to begin 
training January 1.  The Government of Jordan has offered to 
pay the training costs of the first class of recruits, and 
will provide equipment and materials for the training site at 
low cost.  Ambassador Gnehm accompanied the General to his 
meeting with the King at G.I.D. Headquarters. 
 
¶2. (C) After signing the agreement, General Harrell thanked 
the King profusely for his generous support of the program 
and complimented the extraordinary capacity of the Jordanian 
Special Forces.  The King, visibly pleased to hear this, 
described several personal interventions he had made with his 
commanders regarding the counter-terrorism training.  Looking 
ahead, the King said he had asked his commanders to identify 
a number of star performers to bring back for advanced 
training.  The King said he would like to think long-term on 
counter-terrorism training for the Iraqi forces.  General 
Harrell replied that advanced training for the outstanding 
trainees was an excellent idea. 
 
¶3. (C) Comment: The Jordanian Special Forces have made every 
effort to ensure the success of the counter-terrorism 
training program.  Unlike other Jordan-based cooperative 
training arrangements in support of Iraq, such as the nascent 
Iraqi police training center (reftel), planning for the 
counter-terrorism training has gone very smoothly and clearly 
enjoys direct support from the highest levels of the 
government.  The King, who discussed the Iraqi 
counter-terrorism training program with President Bush during 
his recent visit to Washington, has been tremendously 
forthcoming, no doubt due in part to his own special forces 
background and personal relationships with the commanders 
involved. 
GNEHM