This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 LAGOS 002493 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2013 
TAGS: ASEC EPET PGOV PHUM PINR EINV NI
SUBJECT: ETHNIC CLASHES ON THE BENIN RIVER 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1761 
     ¶B. LAGOS 2193 
     ¶C. LAGOS 2434 
 
 
Classified By: JGREGOIRE FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On Friday, December 5, Itsekiri militants 
attacked Ijaws in boats and in villages on the Benin River, 
north of Warri.  There are reports of houses burned and 19 
persons killed.  Nigerian military forces reacted quickly, 
and although some related skirmishes were reported on 
Saturday, calm was restored Sunday.  Ijaw representatives 
tell us they intend no violence in turn, but tension in the 
Delta has been raised a notch in anticipation of a possible 
Ijaw retaliation. END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2. (C) On Friday afternoon, December 5, Post received 
information from several sources that Itsekiri militants 
attacked Ijaws on the Benin River, northeast of Warri in the 
Niger Delta region.  Several days prior to these reports, the 
NGO IFESH, which receives financial support from the USG to 
conduct conflict resolution and skills training programs 
among all ethnic groups in the region, informed Mission 
personnel that it was working to avert a rumored Itsekiri 
raid on Ijaw-held villages.  Late in the afternoon on 
December 5, Lieutenant Colonel Dogo, Commanding Officer of 
the Nigerian Army's Seventh Battalion based in Warri, told 
Econoff that an attack had taken place, but that it was minor 
and limited to boats and villages along the Benin River. 
Col. Dogo said that forces from the Nigerian military joint 
task force, deployed to the area under the aegis Operation 
Restore Hope, swiftly interceded and ended the clashes. 
 
 
------------------ 
The Itsekiri Arise 
------------------ 
 
 
¶3. (C) The Itsekiri have thousands of internally displaced 
persons in the environs of Sapele, which sits on the Benin 
River north of Warri.  During the bloody clashes of March and 
April 2003, Ijaw are said to have raided Itsekiri villages 
along the Benin River, driving Itsekiri from the area and 
resettling the villages in place of the Itsekiris. During a 
visit to the region in October, displaced persons in Sapele 
told Poloff, Econoff and CRO of Ijaw raids, which, they 
claimed, resulted in dozens of deaths, razed homes and entire 
villages emptied of Itsekiri (ref A).  Mission staff also 
visited the town of Koko, which lies on the Benin River north 
of Sapele.  Itsekiri from Koko told Mission staff of a raid 
on that town that destroyed many homes and buildings, 
including the well-developed local government compound, and 
resulted in numerous deaths.  Destruction consistent with 
accounts of the raid remained visible, and the population of 
Itsekiri currently living in Koko is far below the town's 
structural capacity.  At the time of the Mission staff visit, 
Itsekiri of all stripes begged for assistance to return to 
their homes and rebuild their villages and fishing 
capabilities.  But they also insisted that if pushed much 
farther by the Ijaw, they would counter by whatever means 
necessary to stop what they consider to be a form of ethnic 
cleansing, in order to return to their home villages.  In 
October, several clashes between the Itsekiri and Ijaw 
prompted Chevron to review contingency plans for its 
facilities at Escravos, and security consultants onsite told 
us that the Itsekiri were planning for an eventual return to 
their homes (ref B). 
 
 
¶4. (C) On Monday, December 8, Econoff spoke with Kevin Drake, 
a security consultant with Control Risk Group, currently 
working at Chevron's Escravos oil terminal and tank farm 
Southwest of Warri.  Drake told Econoff that the attacks of 
December 5 took place in two locations, one near the village 
of Oye near the mouth of the Benin River, and the other near 
Koko.  Drake described the area around the mouth of the Benin 
River at the Gulf of Guinea as being Itsekiri lands.  He said 
the Ijaw, having previously replaced Itsekiri inhabitants in 
the region, control a small strip of swamp along the Benin 
River north of Oye, sandwiched between what has traditionally 
been Itsekiri communities.  He said on Friday, December 5, 
Itsekiri raiding parties from Oye attacked several Ijaw 
boats.  He was unclear as to the fate of the Ijaw, but he 
said the boats were later taken up river to Koko.  He noted 
that the initial Itsekiri attacks were against Gbaramatu 
clans of the Ijaw, but that Ijaw from the Egbema clan were 
later involved in skirmishes.  This is consistent with news 
reports indicating Itsekiri attacked several Ijaw villages 
along the Benin River, which would now be home to Egbema 
Ijaw.  News reports estimate up to 19 persons were killed. 
 
 
------------------------- 
Military Uses Helicopters 
------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) During the time of the attacks, according to Drake, 
the crew of a Nigerian Joint Task Force helicopter flying 
along the Benin River spotted one or more Itsekiri speedboats 
with armed men on board.  Drake said the Task Force has 
previously made it clear it will not tolerate any speedboat 
activity on the rivers that appears to involve raids or 
illegal activity.  The helicopter crew buzzed the boat or 
boats, which caused the militants to divert their course, 
stand down, and take cover in the swamps.  Drake said that as 
far as he knows, no shots were fired from the helicopter. 
BBC radio reported on December 9 that military helicopters 
were used to buzz the areas around raided villages, and that 
automatic weapons were fired from helicopters into villages. 
The BBC reporter quoted Brigadier General Zamani, commanding 
officer of the Joint Task Force, as saying that his forces 
were using helicopters as a means to disperse clashing 
elements, and that shots may have been fired for that effect, 
although the reporter quoted other witnesses as suggesting 
the military had taken sides.  We have no confirmation of 
this report at this time. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Chevron's security consultant Drake told Econoff that 
skirmishes between the Itsekiri and Ijaw continued through 
Saturday, but by Sunday all was quiet.  He noted that 
statements in the press from Nigerian military commanders 
reporting robust deployment of forces through the riverine 
area were merely "bullish, overblown propaganda," since, by 
his estimate, the military has little logistics capacity to 
deploy troops by boat in the region.  A print news report on 
December 8 suggested that a Navy vessel was taken by Ijaw 
militants and several naval crewmen held hostage.  We have no 
corroboration of that report, and one Ijaw leader denied to 
Poloff any knowledge of such an incident. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
Clashes Limited to the Creeks 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) Drake told Econoff he is confident that at this time 
there is no threat against Chevron oil facilities in the 
Delta from this latest spate of ethnic clashes.  He said 
these attacks are strictly inter-ethnic land grabs and 
retaliatory strikes, and because this fight is for land along 
the Benin River, it should not threaten the company's 
facilities at Escravos.  Chevron has not yet returned to its 
other facilities in the swamps of the Niger Delta after most 
were closed due to vandalism and safety concerns in the wake 
of the larger unrest of March and April. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
Ijaw Promise Not to Retaliate 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) On December 8 and 9, Poloff spoke with several sources 
within the various Ijaw communities.  All stated that the 
current Ijaw position is defensive and that retaliations 
would only come if another attack is visited upon them.  Dan 
Ekpedibe, an Ijaw Youth leader and Secretary of the Federated 
Niger Delta Ijaw Communities (FNDIC), the organization 
believed responsible for starting the recent trend of 
kidnappings and extortion, corroborated the reports and 
stated that although the riverine areas are tense, Warri is 
relatively calm. When asked about the hijacking of a naval 
vessel and the hostage-taking of naval personnel, Ekpedibe 
stated he was not aware of the incident.  Joel Bisina, 
President of the Niger Delta Professionals for Development 
and moderate Ijaw, also discussed the river attacks with 
Poloff.  Bisina, who recently attended decision-making 
meetings with various groups of the Egbema clan of the Ijaws, 
confirmed the Egbema's decision to also stand down and take a 
defensive posture.  In response to the Itsekiri attacks, the 
Ijaws are attempting to meet with Delta State Governor James 
Ibori on December 9 to advocate for a political solution. 
The solution, however, is a repeated demand from the Ijaw to 
create more Local Government Areas in Ijaw territory. 
 
 
¶9. (C) COMMENT. While Ijaw representatives tell us they will 
not stage reprisal raids against the Itsekiri for last 
weekend's attacks, their forebearance is unlikely to be a 
lasting guarantee of peace between these ethnic groups. 
Their villages are scattered throughout the wild and 
complicated Niger Delta swamps and creeks, and coordination 
is difficult.  The Ijaw are more factionalized than the 
Itsekiri, with several leaders, groups and NGOs claiming to 
represent part or all of the Ijaw interest.  Governor Ibori 
of Delta State appointed several Ijaw as special advisors to 
his peace process, an effect of which has been to further 
instill a feeling of mistrust among the more militant 
factions of Ijaw clans. Both sides have weapons and threaten 
to use them to defend themselves and their interests.  Thus, 
the greatest danger in the Delta remains the possibility that 
a series of small skirmishes will spiral out of control, 
causing scores of deaths, massive dislocation of villagers, 
and possibly renewed attacks on oil installations in the 
region.  Nigerian military action remains a wild card.  The 
military response in the region since the build-up of 
Operation Restore Hope has been measured and relatively 
effective, and the Navy recently increased its presence in 
the deeper waters of the Delta (ref C).  However, given the 
brazenness in which illegal and violent activities have taken 
place recently, a heavy-handed military response with 
civilian casualties -- as was seen in recent years during 
other Nigerian internal conflicts -- still weighs on the 
minds of Delta watchers as a possible worst-case scenario. 
END COMMENT. 
HINSON-JONES