This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 002449 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION SPECIAL: PRESIDENT BUSH'S 
PROPOSED TRIP TO KUWAIT 
 
SUMMARY: The postponement of a June Presidential visit to 
Kuwait has generated front-page coverage and commentary in 
all Arabic dailies. Although some pique is evident, a number 
of liberal commentators use the cancellation to criticize 
the government for failing to adopt progressive domestic 
policies. "What would President Bush do if he visited 
Kuwait?" writes liberal lawyer Hassan al Issa.  "Will he be 
coming to shake hands with the killers of the two American 
civilians near Camp Doha (or) listen to Kuwaiti women at the 
National Assembly?" Another writes, "Can't our American 
friends be frank with the Kuwaiti leadership with regards to 
their demands and what they believe to be useful steps to 
reform, not only in the economic field, but also in the 
political and security fields?"   END SUMMARY. 
 
¶1.   News stories: On May 31, Al-Qabas reported on its front 
page that Kuwaiti political circles were "astonished" that 
Kuwait was left out of the President's regional tour. 
 
On June 1, all newspapers report Acting Prime Minister 
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed's announcement that President Bush has 
"delayed but not cancelled" his visit to Kuwait, originally 
scheduled for early June, due in part to security concerns. 
 
All newspapers report on June 3 that when asked if Kuwait 
was upset that Qatar was on the President's itinerary but 
Kuwait was not, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Dr. 
Sheikh Mohammed Al-Sabah said, "Kuwait and Doha are one, and 
we act as one country within our GCC framework." 
 
¶3.  "What Is It To Kuwait If Bush Doesn't Visit?" 
Liberal Editor-in-Chief of Al-Rai Al-Aam, Jassim Boodai 
opined (5/31): "The lives of Kuwaitis and the Kuwaiti 
economy will not collapse if President Bush postpones or 
calls off his visit to Kuwait due to security reasons, as 
the Americans claim. President Bush is welcome in Kuwait, 
but we did not play a role in the liberation of Iraq as a 
favor to him or America. Rather, we did it for the sake of 
the Iraqis. because a glance from an Iraqi child towards 
Kuwait's humanitarian assistance is better than a protocol 
meeting, even with the master of the White House." 
 
¶4.  "Why Are We Angry At Being Ignored?" 
Liberal Lawyer Hassan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(6/01): "President Bush has overlooked Kuwait, and removed 
Kuwait from his itinerary. Instead, he will be heading to 
Qatar. What would President Bush do if he visits Kuwait?  . 
Will he be coming to shake hands with the killers of the two 
American civilians near Camp Doha, or with the killers of 
the American Marine on Failaka Island? Is Mr. Bush coming to 
witness how Kuwait has acted on US advice to be cautious of 
the Islamic currents in Kuwait, or is he coming to listen to 
Kuwait's women at the National Assembly? So, do we have the 
right to be angry if Kuwait is not included in his trip to 
the region?" 
 
¶5.  "Skipping Kuwait" 
Liberal Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa, Chairman of Political Science 
Department at Kuwait University, wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (6/01): "President Bush's decision to travel to 
Qatar instead of Kuwait has several political dimensions 
that are not remotely linked to security. How did Qatar 
succeed in befriending America? . Qatar took the shortest 
route to gaining America's friendship by moving closer to 
Israel. Qatar fully ignored all Arab and GCC resolutions, 
and its Foreign Minister Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassim met with 
the Israeli Foreign Minister. The United States is currently 
playing a major role in changing the regimes of the region, 
therefore, there is no room for those who are hesitant, 
fearful or trade in slogans." 
 
¶6.  "Are We Going To Wake Up Before It's Too Late?" 
Liberal former Oil Minister and former MP Ahmad Al-Baghli 
wrote in independent Al-Qabas (6/01): "Many people 
sympathized with [Al-Qaeda official spokesperson Sulaiman] 
Bu Gaith. Had it been left to our kind-hearted government, 
he would have been totally pardoned. Our government has 
actually assisted fundamentalist youths. Bu Gaith and others 
who hold Kuwaiti citizenship and openly spread their poison 
in newspapers and over the Internet and incite people to 
violence are responsible for the belief that Kuwait is 
unsafe and insecure, thus excluding Kuwait from President 
Bush's tour of the region." 
¶7.  "Does Terrorism Deserve Such Exaggeration?" 
Liberal Dr. Ayed Al-Manna wrote in independent Al-Watan 
(6/4):  "British Prime Minister Tony Blair paid a quick 
visit to Kuwait and then crossed over to Iraq. What then 
justifies the recommendation of US intelligence to President 
Bush that he cancel or postpone his trip to Kuwait? Is there 
doubt as to the effectiveness of Kuwaiti security, or is 
this decision based on political, not security, 
considerations? If this is the case, is the cancellation or 
postponement a form of low-key objection?  Can't our 
American friends be frank with the Kuwaiti leadership with 
regards to their demands and what they believe to be useful 
steps to reform, not only in the economic field, but also in 
the political and security fields?" 
 
 
JONES