This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR AND S/ES-O 
USTR FOR NOVELLI/SAUMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD PREL OVIP JO POWELL COLIN
SUBJECT: Invitations to Foreign/Trade Ministers Event 
during World Economic Forum 
 
¶1.  Post received the following two letters from Foreign 
Minister Marwan Muasher for transmission to Secretary 
Powell and Ambassador Zoellick.  The letters are 
identical with the exception of portions marked with 
parentheses.  Originals have been faxed to NEA/ARN. 
 
¶2. Begin text: 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary (Dear Mr. Ambassador), 
 
As you are aware, an Extraordinary Annual Meeting of the 
World Economic Forum will be held in Jordan under the 
patronage of His Majesty King Abdullah II during the 
period June 21-23, 2003.  The participants of this unique 
gathering will constitute a broad range of political, 
economic, business and media leaders who will deliberate 
on issues ranging from strengthening international 
collaboration to global economic performance, as well as 
mechanisms to achieve regional and global peace and 
sustainable socio-economic development. 
 
Capitalizing on such an event, Jordan would like to 
provide Arab countries with the opportunity to discuss 
during a side meeting, the initiative of the Honorable 
President of the United States for establishing a 
partnership of peace and a Free Trade Area Zone with Arab 
countries.  Accordingly, I have extended invitations to 
representatives of the Governments of Morocco, Tunisia, 
Algeria, Egypt, Yemen, Oman, Qatar, Bahrain, Saudi 
Arabia, Kuwait, UAE and the Palestinian Authority to 
attend a working lunch on the sidelines of the 
Extraordinary Annual Meeting of the World Economic Forum, 
to be held under the Patronage of His Majesty King 
Abdullah II, at 1:30pm, on Monday, June 23, 2003, at the 
Dead Sea Marriott Hotel. 
 
I have therefore the privilege of inviting your Honorable 
and the US Trade Representative, His Excellency Robert 
Zoellick (your Excellency and the US Secretary of State, 
the Honorable Colin Powell) to attend the said meeting in 
an effort to initiate a continued dialogue and a 
productive exchange of ideas on how best to realize this 
important initiative. 
 
I would greatly appreciate your confirmation in joining 
us for this important gathering.  In the meantime, please 
accept my high esteem and consideration. 
 
S/ 
Dr. Marwan Muasher 
 
End text. 
 
GNEHM