This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 005186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION SPECIAL, NOVEMBER 12: 
TERRORIST ATTACK IN RIYADH 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Condemnations of the Riyadh attacks have 
dominated the Kuwaiti Arabic press this week, with liberals 
and Islamists alike interpreting the attacks as a distortion 
of Islam and an assault on the political structure of Saudi 
Arabia and other Gulf governments. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News Stories: Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad phoned 
the Saudi Crown Prince and expressed the strong condemnation 
of the Kuwaiti government and people of the terrorist attack 
in Riyadh on November 9. Sheikh Sabah reiterated the 
Kuwait's solidarity with the Kingdom and its readiness to 
assist "our Saudi brothers." The Minister of Interior Sheikh 
Nawaf Al-Ahmed stated, "The security of Kuwait and Saudi 
Arabia are interconnected."? 
 
Kuwait's Council of Ministers (Cabinet) strongly denounced 
the terrorist acts in Saudi Arabia. The National Assembly 
issued a statement that the Assembly "condemns every 
terrorist act whatever its motives or pattern" and stressed 
"the security and stability of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are 
integral".?   ? 
 
Islamist MP Khalid Al-Adwa argued that such terrorist acts 
distorted the image of Islam and Muslims, especially during 
the holy month of Ramadan. 
 
The Islamic Bloc and five Kuwaiti Islamic charity 
organizations issued statements of condemnation. The 
statement from the Revival of Islamic Heritage Society 
termed the attacks "suicide operations, not martyr 
operations," and called them a violation of Islamic Sharia 
(religious law). 
 
Kuwaiti Shiite scholars issued a statement strongly 
denouncing the recent attacks by "criminal extremists" in 
Riyadh and condemned the "barbaric and brutal attack by 
attackers who do not believe in Islam and want to take 
revenge against Muslims and pilgrims." 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Terrorism in the Name of Islam"Liberal Secretary 
General of the Kuwait Journalist Association Faisal Al-Qanai 
wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (11/11): "What took place 
in Saudi Arabia poses a threat to GCC countries. Islamic 
clerics and scholars must therefore begin a campaign to 
protect religion from attempts by terrorists and criminals 
to undermine the image of Islam through sabotage and 
terrorist activities." 
 
¶4.  "Criminals, not Muslims" 
Liberal Talal Abdul-Kareem Al-Arab wrote in independent Al- 
Qabas (11/11):  "The perpetrators [of the November 9 Riyadh 
bombing] are the new outlaws, emerging from their dens to 
terrify our children and threaten our security under the 
pretext of being against infidels and occupiers. This is an 
organized and hidden campaign against Muslims and Islam. The 
campaign relies on an educated group to incite young Muslims 
to carry out criminal acts and others who are ready to 
sacrifice their lives for money in return for a mission that 
in no way relates to Islam." 
 
¶5.  "What do Terrorists Want?" 
Liberal Secretary General of the National Democratic Forum, 
Dr. Ahmad Bishara, wrote in independent Al-Qabas (11/11): 
"These terrorists exploit internal conditions [in Saudi 
Arabia] such as unemployment, a deteriorating economy, and 
restraints on public freedom. On the other hand, wide 
freedoms are given to Islamic groups and organizations to 
spread their narrow vision of life and religion. Such an 
atmosphere provides fertile ground for terrorist ideology. 
Confronting terrorism requires winning over regular citizens 
and making them feel they are part of the battle against 
terrorism. Passive citizens who lack a role in their 
countries become fuel for the battle." 
 
¶6.  "Torturing Bodies to Frighten Nations" 
Mohammad Al-Ajmi wrote in independent Al-Watan (11/12): 
"The terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia coincided with the 
beginning of reforms in the Kingdom through establishing an 
open dialogue. This signifies that those who are behind the 
attack do not believe in the language of dialogue and reject 
reforms. They strongly believe in violence and killing as a 
means to achieve their goals. Such terrorist attacks should 
not hinder reforms. Instead, they should serve as a motive 
to continue with more reforms." 
 
¶7.  "Riyadh's Incident" 
Khudair Al-Anzi wrote in independent Al-Qabas (11/12):  "We 
are in a real crisis. There is no guarantee that what 
happened in Saudi Arabia will not happen in Kuwait or any 
other country. Extremism has become an international 
phenomenon. The attacks in Riyadh and Mecca indicate we are 
facing a dangerous ideology. There should be no dialogue 
with such ideology, but rather eradicating such thought will 
protect the whole of society." 
 
¶8.  "Mecca and Riyadh Explosions" 
Liberal columnist and Media Advisor to the Prime Minister, 
Sami Al-Nisf, wrote in independent Al-Anba (11/11):  "In 
Riyadh, apostates of Islam chose a safe residential complex 
occupied mostly by Muslims to act out their cold-blooded 
crime. Can anything justify such a criminal act during this 
holy month [of Ramadan]? . Who else would benefit from such 
organized criminal acts by Al-Qaeda terrorist organization 
except the enemies of Arabism and Islam." 
 
¶9.  "Terrorism is Threatening All of Us" 
Editor-in-chief of independent Al-Qabas, Waleed Al-Nesef 
opined (11/10): "The terrorists who carried out the attack 
in Riyadh wanted to stress that they will strike anywhere, 
that their crimes will not be limited to Americans and 
Westerners. These terrorist groups have declared 
comprehensive war against the [Saudi] regime. The threat to 
Saudi Arabia is also a threat to the GCC and the entire 
region." 
 
¶10.  "Forbidding the Permissible" 
Liberal Mohammad Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(11/10): "The key foe of the Islamic militants is America 
and therefore members of Al-Qaeda threatened to strike 
against the American interests. However, the regretful 
attack in Saudi Arabia was not against American interests: 
the landlord of the building is a Saudi citizen, and the 
tenets who were killed in the attack were Arabs. Isn't this 
proof that the extremists seek the destruction of Saudi 
Arabia? Such terrorist acts are expected to happen again 
either in Kuwait, Bahrain or Saudi Arabia therefore, 
governments must be alert for extremist plans." 
 
 
URBANCIC