This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 002070 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
S/CT FOR REAP 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: 2003 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
 
REF: STATE 301352 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION ON THE 
INTERNET OR INTRANET. 
 
 
¶1. Post provides the following input for the 2003 Annual 
Terrorism Report.  The information is keyed to the questions 
asked in REFTEL: 
 
 
¶2.  A. Civilian rule returned to Nigeria with the 
inauguration of Olusegun Obasanjo as President in May 1999. 
Since his inauguration, President Obasanjo has pursued an 
active international agenda commensurate with Nigeria's 
perception of its role as a leader in both continental and 
world affairs. 
 
 
¶3.  President Obasanjo's government was among the first to 
send condolences after the September 11 attacks.  More 
importantly, Nigeria steadfastly and publicly lent its 
diplomatic support to Coalition efforts against the Taliban 
and Al Queda despite the domestic political ramifications of 
being home to Africa's second largest Muslim population. The 
GON did not publicly support the invasion of Iraq, however, 
it has taken steps to insure the security of Americans and 
American property in Nigeria.  The GON backed UN Resolutions 
1267, 1333 and 1368 and has initiated legislative and 
regulatory steps to shore up its anti-money laundering regime 
in order to fight terrorism. The New Partnership for African 
Development (NePAD), an organization founded by Obasanjo and 
other African Heads of State, has condemned terrorism and 
called for concrete measures to be taken by African states to 
combat the scourge. Nigeria is signatory to three UN 
counter-terrorism conventions and is reviewing other UN 
conventions with the view of acceding to these instruments. 
 
 
¶4.  Nigeria also has taken on a leading role in making 
counter-terrorism an important issue in West Africa, the 
sub-region where Nigeria's diplomatic and political influence 
is most pronounced. 
 
 
¶5.  B. Judiciary: There have been no known acts of terrorism 
nor criminal prosecutions of terrorists during the year. 
While current criminal law does not contain many specific 
anti-terrorism provisions, the penal code does proscribe acts 
of violence, which includes terrorism. Because President 
Obasanjo has given terrorism a high priority, the GON is 
moving quickly to draft improved terrorism legislation. 
Likewise, the judiciary probably would prosecute diligently 
any cases of terrorism and would cooperate with the USG in 
prosecution despite some of the institutional shortcomings of 
the judiciary, i.e. understaffing, corruption, lack of 
equipment, large caseloads and inadequate pay. 
 
 
¶6.  C. Extradition: The GON did not extradite any suspected 
terrorists or request extradition of any terrorists during 
the year. 
 
 
¶7.  D. Possible Impediments to Prosecution/ Extradition: 
There are no known legal impediments to prosecution or 
extradition of suspected terrorists.  However, members of 
both the police force and the judiciary have been susceptible 
to corruption in the past. Given the high-level GON focus on 
counter-terrorism, it would be difficult for corrupt 
practices to impede the prosecution or extradition of any 
high-visibility terrorism cases. 
 
 
¶8.  E. Other Responses: The GON has publicly condemned acts 
of terrorism. 
 
 
¶9. The Central Bank of Nigeria has been helpful in 
circulating lists of terrorist organizations.  The CBN has 
promised to confiscate terrorist assets should they be 
discovered.  To date, no terrorist assets have been 
discovered.  Unfortunately, institutions with 
responsibilities for fighting terrorist financing are weak. 
 
 
¶10.  F. International Fora: The GON has given clear 
diplomatic support in the UN and within the Economic 
Community of West African States to counter-terrorism. 
 
 
¶11.  G. The GON does not support international terrorism or 
terrorists. The GON clearly and repeatedly has condemned 
terrorism and followed up with concrete actions. However, 
some individuals and private groups in Nigeria have ties to 
and perhaps receive funding from sources in Sudan, Iran, 
Pakistan and Libya.  It is possible that some of these 
individuals or groups may have indirect links with extremist 
or terrorist organizations. 
 
 
¶12.  H. Public Statements: The GON has made no public 
statements supporting terrorism or any terrorist group.  All 
GON statements have been against terrorism. 
¶13.  I. Change in Posture: The GON has continued to be vocal 
in its opposition to terrorism. 
¶14.  J. Bilateral Cooperation: The Central Bank of Nigeria 
(CBN) responded quickly to USG requests to identify and 
freeze terrorist assets if found in Nigeria.  The CBN issued 
a Call Circular requiring all banks to identify any terrorist 
entities listed in Executive Order 13224.  The CBN has 
amended the list several times to reflect USG additions. 
Although no assets have been found to date, the CBN requires 
banks within its jurisdiction to continuously monitor 
accounts.  The CBN also has implemented stricter customer 
identification procedures that require banks to maintain 
sufficient information about customers and correspondent 
financial institutions. 
 
 
¶15.  In general, the Nigerian Police and other security 
forces have cooperated, within the limitations of their 
capabilities, in combating terrorism and in protecting 
American citizen residents, USG personnel and USG 
installations. 
MEECE