This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002126 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2020 
TAGS: PARM KNNP ENRG TU IAEA
SUBJECT: IAEA & IRAN: TURKS TO PASS USG POINTS TO THEIR 
VIENNA MISSION; REQUEST CLARIFICATION 
 
 
REF: STATE 81552 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  Please see para 4. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Polmiloff met MFA Disarmament Department Head Ibrahim 
Yagli on March 31 and delivered reftel points.  Regarding the 
information outlined in reftel para 2, tick 2, Yagli asked 
whether the USG thought Iran had conducted experiments beyond 
the enrichment of uranium or if we were saying that Iran had 
failed to report to IAEA experiments related only to 
enrichment efforts.  Polmiloff advised that we read reftel 
points to mean the former, but said that we would get back to 
MFA if that interpretation were incorrect. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) Yagli said he would pass our information to the 
Turkish Mission in Vienna, where personnel from the Turkish 
Atomic Energy Authority take the lead in examining Iran's 
compliance with its NPT commitments.  Yagli added that he 
knew that Iran is a party to the "standard" safeguards 
protocol, but he wondered if the USG had any information that 
Iran may be considering signing the additional safeguard 
protocol.  In any event, he advocated that the IAEA board of 
governors take a "step-by-step" approach to analyzing Iran's 
compliance and to pushing for greater Iranian transparency. 
From the Turkish perspective, Iran's becoming a party to the 
additional protocol ought not be enough to satisfy the IAEA. 
Noting that, as a neighbor of Iran, Turkey is keenly 
interested, Yagli concluded by asking that the USG continue 
to share with Turkey as much information about Iran's nuclear 
efforts as it can.  He particularly signaled out USNATO's 
presentations to Allies in Brussels as "valuable." 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Action Request: Per para 2, if the correct reading of 
reftel points is that Iran has conducted experiments beyond 
uranium enrichment efforts, please advise so that we can 
reply to our Turkish interlocutors.  End Action Request. 
 
 
PEARSON