This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 000692 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/12/2013 
TAGS: PREL PARM MOPS IZ CA UNSC
SUBJECT: IRAQ/UNSC: CANADA STILL WORKING - AT THE HIGHEST 
LEVELS - TO "BRIDGE THE DIVIDE" 
 
REF: (A) USUN NEW YORK 656 (B) OTTAWA 589 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Stephen R. Kelly, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) As seen from Canada's proposal for a new UNSC 
resolution on Iraq (reftel A), the GoC continues to be active 
in seeking a compromise solution at the Security Council. 
Officials at the Prime Minister's Office (PMO), the Privy 
Council Office (PCO), and Foreign Affairs (DFAIT) have 
confirmed to us that GoC efforts on Iraq are being personally 
handled by Prime Minister Jean Chretien, PCO Foreign Policy 
Advisor Claude Laverdure, and Canada's Ambassador to the UN 
Paul Heinbecker.   PMO's Paul Genet told the DCM that 
Laverdure has the lead on Iraq.  DFAIT's Jon Allen told us 
that Heinbecker had been "chomping at the bit" to put forward 
a Canadian proposal at the UN.  PCO's Rob Fonberg (protect) 
told the DCM "there is no question that the Prime Minister is 
in the lead," but that the Iraq file is being handled 
primarily by PCO, with only limited input by DFAIT.  Fonberg 
also speculated that Clerk of the Privy Council Alex 
Himelfarb, a staunch multilateralist, has been advising 
Chretien not to do anything in Iraq without UN support, or 
perhaps even with it. 
 
¶2. (C) Commodore Dan McNeil, Laverdure's Director of 
Operations and Strategic Planning, told us that the Prime 
Minister continues to be heavily engaged in lobbying Security 
Council heads of state.  Chretien spoke again with British 
Prime Minister Blair on March 12, and was to speak again 
later that day with Chilean President Lagos and Mexican 
President Fox.  McNeil expressed concern that Lagos might 
support the French position, which Canada found unacceptable, 
and that Mexico was considering a proposal for the UN to 
deploy 50,000 blue helmets in Iraq. 
 
¶3. (C) McNeil reiterated to us that Canada's objectives are 
(1) disarmament of Iraq and (2) the Security Council living 
up to its obligations.  Canada knows the U.S. cannot keep its 
military forces in a holding pattern much longer, he 
continued, and Canada's proposal sets a concrete deadline for 
action (April 15) if Iraq does not meet disarmament targets. 
McNeil said Chretien recognizes war is now inevitable, but 
that he must reckon with anti-war sentiment in Canada, 
including in his own Cabinet. 
 
¶4. (C) COMMENT: While Chretien realizes we do not support the 
GoC proposal, he sees the need for a UNSC compromise and will 
remain personally engaged to try to achieve it.  Given 
France's determination to veto any resolution sanctioning 
military action, Canada's best hope now is for a resolution 
supported by most Security Council members.  Like the 
British, Canada would seize upon such a vote as expressing 
the will of the Security Council, albeit without passage due 
to veto. 
CELLUCCI