This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000607 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/27/2013 
TAGS: PGOV YM DOMESTIC POLITICS
SUBJECT: TFIZ01:SANAA FSNS: ANXIETY AND HINTS OF BACKLASH 
 
REF: SANAA 521 
 
Classified By: Classified by DCM Alan G. Misenheimer, for reasons 1.5 b 
. and d. 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Sanaa FSNs report heightened worry from 
friends and relatives about their working at U.S. Embassy. 
Several expressed concern that they may unwittingly be the 
means to an attack on US personnel or property, and some feel 
that they themselves may become targets because of their 
association with the U.S. Mission. The Ambassador and DCM 
held a meeting with all the FSNs, and several section chiefs 
have met with their FSNs this week to take the pulse on the 
community, which provides a lens with which to view 
unofficial Yemeni reaction to current events. End Summary. 
 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Connection with U.S. Mission Questioned 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Several FSNs reported that their spouses, children, 
extended family and friends had expressed heightened concern 
about their working for the American Embassy and coming to 
work this week. They were particularly worried about 
Thursday, March 27th, the first day of the weekend after the 
March 21st violent demonstration.  Many thought that 
demonstrations could begin that afternoon and several 
supervisors were approached concerning Embassy closure that 
day. (Note: Embassy Sanaa did move to StandFast on March 27 
because of a government sponsored demonstration which was 
peaceful and uneventful. No demonstrations were held on March 
¶28. End Note.) Other FSNs told us that they do not express 
their political views among friends and family, and in some 
cases try not to speak of their association with the Embassy. 
 In one case, a third country FSN who may have been mistaken 
for an American had rocks thrown at her by children on the 
way to the Embassy. 
 
---------------------------- 
Fears of Violence Increasing 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) One FSN reported going to "Al-Aql" mosque on Friday, 
March 21 and said that he would not have been surprised if 
worshipers had committed violence had the Imam called on them 
specifically to do so. He said people were very upset, and 
the Imam had compared US actions to the Mongols sacking 
Baghdad. Another FSN in a different section reported that he 
felt that the average person may be increasingly inclined 
towards violence.  He added that the anger is still there, it 
is just not being expressed.  FSNs also reported feeling more 
vulnerable in their commutes to and from the Embassy, fearing 
that they may be watched and could be targeted for their 
association with post. 
 
------------------- 
Work Relationships 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Some working relationships with ROYG officials and 
other Yemeni contacts, according to several FSNs in different 
sections, have broken down.  Requests for information have 
been put off, or delayed, and some are feeling some backlash. 
Pol/Econ FSNs requested that we hold off on making new 
appointments right now due to political sensitivities. 
However, one of the development FSNs reported that this 
contacts at the Ministry of Health actively encouraged U.S. 
development activities to proceed at full speed in order to 
complete projects already underway. 
 
¶5. (C) Supervisors have been extremely impressed with our 
FSN's sense of loyalty and committment to the mission.  Post 
affirms that while some of the external working relationships 
may have cooled, we have not seen any such reaction from our 
FSN employees. FSNs have been working at home during 
temporary Embassy closures, worked weekends to feed staff 
quartered in the Embassy, and provided valuable information 
while security procedures have curtailed much outside 
activity for the American community. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Reaction to Increased Security Measures for FSNS 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶6. (C) The Ambassador met with FSNs on March 25 to discuss 
new security concerns and to gauge public reaction to the war 
in Iraq.   The Ambassador listened to all of their concerns 
and assured our FSNs that their concerns were being addressed 
and the FSNs were an integral part of the Mission team.  New 
security procedures (Ref cable) involve increased screening 
for FSNs entering the building and moving FSN parking outside 
of the Embassy compound.  One FSN said, "I don't care if they 
check me seven or eight times, security is for everyone." On 
March 26, Ambassador walked the Embassy perimeter with RSO, 
FSN committee representatives and Central Security 
Organization (CSO) on-site commander. A useful security 
exercise, it also served as a morale booster for our FSNs who 
work inside the Embassy, our Local Guard Force (LGF) and the 
CSO soldiers assigned to protect us. 
 
¶7. (C) Comment: With heightened security procedures for 
American personnel limiting our outside contacts, post has 
become more reliant upon the information provided by our 
FSNs. This summary of their experiences provides a glimpse 
into the mood of Sanaa. End Comment. 
HULL