This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002504 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/18/2008 
TAGS: PREL TU IS
SUBJECT: TURKS AND ISRAELIS SAY THEY ARE PLEASED WITH 
FOREIGN  MINISTER SHALOM'S VISIT TO TURKEY 
 
 
REF: TEL AVIV 1959 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch for reasons 
1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: The Israeli Embassy used terms 
like "positive, excellent," and Turkish MFA "successful" 
to describe Israeli Foreign Minister Shalom's first 
official visit to Turkey April 13-14.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Israeli DCM Nahshon told us April 15 plans for 
FonMin Shalom's April 13-14 visit had been in suspense 
a "long time" -- the last time an Israeli FonMin 
visited Turkey was during Turkish FonMin Cem's tenure, 
more than a year ago.  Nahshon averred that the two 
countries share interests in many fields.  He noted 
Israel accepted "with gratitude" Turkey's offer to 
play "any role" it could in the Middle East Peace 
Negotiations, although nothing formal is envisioned 
currently.  Turkish MFA Levant desk officer Demirok 
told us Shalom began his travel with a private visit 
with the Jewish community in Istanbul prior to his 
official meetings with President Sezer P.M. Erdogan 
and FonMin Gul. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Nahshon and Demirok noted discussions also 
focused on working together on water projects in 
Turkey's GAP region.  The two counties expect to 
sign a bilateral agreement in May to transport 50 
million cubic meters of water/year for 20 years from 
Manavgat, Turkey, to an Israeli port, most likely Haifa. 
Israel plans to offer the water shipping contract for 
public tender. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Nahshon said Israel and Turkey have different 
perspectives, but not necessarily different opinions, 
regarding terrorism emanating from Syria and Lebanon. 
Assuring us Turkey is justified in embarking on new 
dialogue with Syria, he said that as a result of 
Shalom's visit Israel understood the Turks would 
visit Syria to "understand the Syrian mind and to 
tell them they are making a mistake in their current 
policy." 
 
 
¶5.  (C)  Comment: Prevailing wisdom in Ankara is that, 
while the AK government does not want to be seen by 
its conservative grass roots to be embracing Israel, 
Erdogan and Gul now recognize relations with Israel 
are an untouchable equity of the Turkish military. 
End comment. 
PEARSON