This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ACCRA 000689 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/09/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM GH
SUBJECT: RULING NPP NOTCHES WIN NUMBER FIVE 
 
REF: ACCRA 0632 
 
Classified By: Polchief Richard Kaminski, reason 1.5(B/D). 
 
Once More With Feeling 
---------------------- 
 
¶1.  (U)  Thirteen days after its convincing by-election win 
in Navrongo (reftel), President Kufuor's ruling New Patriotic 
Party (NPP) won by a similarly large margin in the Gomoa East 
by-election March 8.  The NPP candidate received 11,380 votes 
to the NDC's 5,356 (a minor party candidate received 175 
votes).  With this victory, the fifth consecutive win over 
former President Rawling's NDC in parliamentary by-elections, 
the NPP held a seat vacant since the death of its MPP in a 
car accident several months ago. 
 
NDC Claims Electoral Fraud 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  In increasingly histrionic terms, the NDC has 
claimed electoral fraud and voter intimidation.  Rawlings, 
the day before the by-election, held an emotional press 
conference in which he alleged "incredible electoral 
malpractices," including "officially-sanctioned violence," 
which, he alleged, were "brazen and seemingly 
institutionalized."  Immediately after the announcement of 
the results by the Electoral Commission, the NDC General 
Secretary Dr. Josiah-Aryeh announced his party's rejection of 
 
SIPDIS 
the results (without specifying what, if any, actions he or 
other party officials would take as a result).  Rawlings also 
called upon Ghanaians to join a "March for Survival" called 
by the NDC to protest the NPP government's "disastrous 
economic policies," "entrenched nepotism," and "gross abuse 
of incumbency." 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  However, the election was in fact largely peaceful 
and uneventful, but for a few isolated shouting matches 
between rival party supporters.  Emboffs circulating on 
election day saw no sign of harassment or intimidation of 
voters.  In an election with a relatively low turnout by 
Ghanaian standards, approximately 40 percent, many election 
officials had little to do during long hours of slow voting 
on a hot and humid day (all polling stations located out of 
doors) but fan themselves and find a bit of shade.  Officers 
from the British Mission had observations similar to our own. 
 A nine-member team from a prominent local NGO, the Center 
for Democratic Development, declared the results to be "free 
and fair despite some incidents." 
 
NPP Takes No Prisoners 
---------------------- 
 
 ¶4.  (SBU)  The NPP government does employ its powers of 
incumbency without hesitation.  As in Navrongo, Vice 
President Aliu Mahama toured the constituency for several 
days just before the election as part of an "official" trip 
to the Central Region, and police canceled 
previously-scheduled NDC rallies ostensibly for his 
"security" (this time the NDC refused to reschedule several 
of them).  Crews from the government-owned Electricity 
Company of Ghana feverishly hung poles and strung wire from 
community to community up to and including election day, and 
extra road crews worked on farms roads across the area. The 
funeral of the deceased MP, two days before the vote, became 
an extended NPP roadshow, with the coffin taken from town to 
town, and President Kufuor attending services.  Direct cash 
payments to traditional leaders, and "gifts" of roofing tin, 
fuel, cloth and other items to constituents, while difficult 
to confirm, are common practice by all political parties. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  One more by-election comes in two weeks time, this 
in a constituency vacant after the NDC MP resigned for 
"personal reasons."  Some of those reasons include division 
and disenchantment within NDC ranks.  While the NPP devotes 
considerable resources to by-elections, the NDC, out of 
power, out of money, and out of favor with the electorate, 
strains to compete.  Local reaction to former President 
Rawlings broad attack on the Kufuor government has been 
relatively muted; his comments simply do not reflect the 
actual experience of Ghanaians.  One worry: while the NPP 
takes great delight in handing the NDC yet another crushing 
loss, the level of emotion on the part of some NDC activists 
is rising; they are beginning to substitute hot-headed 
threats for cool analysis of their own poor showing.  Another 
stinging defeat may be coming their way.  End comment. 
 
 
YATES