This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/07/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S SOUTHEAST: LEADING MARDIN M.P.S SUPPORT 
U.S. -- WHILE HAKKARI DYP BACKS "THE STATE" 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 2018 
     ¶B. ANKARA 1631 
     ¶C. ADANA 95 
 
 
 (U) Classified by Political Counselor John Kunstadter. 
Reasons: 1.5(b)(d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Prominent Kurdish M.P.s representing the 
border province of Mardin for both ruling AK and opposition 
CHP support the U.S.-led war against Saddam.  Despite (1) 
pressure from elements within AK, (2) outright hostility from 
the CHP and the Turkish State, and (3) the ethnically Turkish 
public's strong anti-war sentiment, these M.P.s tell us 
their own personal and regional political interests, and 
those of their constituents, are supported by the USG 
approach, not the approach of Ankara.  Meanwhile, an M.P. 
representing Hakkari for right-of-center DYP -- which is 
trying to revive its fortunes by tying itself to the security 
forces -- charges that the USG is supporting Turkey's enemies 
including the N. Iraqi Kurdish "bandits," the PKK, and 
Kurdish Hizbullah.  End summary. 
 
 
------------------------------ 
Memo to Baykal: Give It A Rest 
------------------------------ 
 
 
¶2. (C) CHP deputy Mahmut Duyan, scion of the huge Duyan 
Kurdish tribe in the Mardin Turkey-Syria-Iraq area, told us 
April 4 he has faced a barrage of criticism from party 
colleagues and associated media because he rented property to 
the U.S. military in the region.  Flipping through a file of 
newspaper articles lambasting his business deals with the 
U.S., Duyan noted that the reaction against him has only 
reinforced his support for U.S. efforts in the region. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Indeed, Duyan declared that "I would now be willing to 
provide land for free to the U.S.  My conscience is clear." 
He asserted that in any event he had joined CHP only to 
receive financial assistance for the November 2002  national 
elections.  He also noted that the Duyan tribe is 
theoretically large enough to provide enough votes for an 
independent seat in the legislature.  Duyan, formerly with 
right-of-center DYP that long dominated the province, claimed 
that CHP "now needs me more than I need them." 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Memo to Tayyip: Listen Up -- Because TGS Doesn't 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
¶4. (C) April 3 an AK Party M.P., a leading conservative 
figure in both Mardin and the wider region, gave us a 
pro-U.S., decidedly anti-Turkish State view.  "The Turkish 
state has absolutely no right -- none -- to intervene 
unilaterally in northern Iraq" under any conditions, the M.P. 
said.  If the Turkish military does so, it will have face a 
Kurdish uprising in Turkey that will make the PKK pale by 
comparison, he stated.  The criticism emanating from AK 
elements and the Establishment alike regarding alleged USG 
"massacres" of civilians in Iraq is simply ridiculous, he 
asserted.  He then produced a large, framed poster of the 
results of Saddam's chemical attack on Halabja in 1988, 
noting that Turks remain largely silent about the Baath'ist 
regime's ongoing atrocities against civilians. 
 
 
¶5. (C) "We (Kurds) have real problems throughout the region" 
-- political, economic, and social -- the M.P. explained. 
Instead of dealing with these, however, the Turkish State, 
"as represented by the military," insists on an approach that 
over time has only humiliated the Kurds and made them feel 
less tied to Ankara.  "Throughout the region you see 
mountains with messages carved into them that proclaim that 
Turkey is for the Turks.  Why don't you see the same in 
Kastamonu or Corum" or elsewhere in ethnically Turkish 
central Anatolia, he asked rhetorically.  The deputy added 
that he repeatedly gives the same message to P.M. Erdogan, 
who knows he has a problem; meanwhile, the military and other 
elements of the Turkish State refuse to listen. 
 
 
¶6. (C) The M.P. observed that the various tribes, landlords 
(aghas), and tarikat lodges retain considerable influence in 
the southeast.  The current "feudal structure" in Mardin, he 
said, is closely tied to the Turkish State, which uses it to 
manipulate politics and keep the region under control.  He 
expressed hope, however, that the tribes and tarikats would 
in the future be able to play a more "positive" role 
regarding Kurdish issues.  While there are still some 
diehards that support the approach of Ankara, "90 percent of 
the people now have their eyes open" to the realities on the 
ground in Mardin and elsewhere. 
 
 
------------------------- 
DYP: Remnants of Susurluk 
------------------------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) DYP, long in control of the Mardin municipality, has 
long been seen by the Turkish State as a political means to 
keep the province and the wider region "stable" -- as 
evidenced in part by the 1996 Susurluk scandal and the nexus 
of security forces, primarily DYP M.P.s, and organized crime 
groups that fought the PKK.  That nexus still involves some 
DYP elements in the southeast, who retain their sizeable 
paramilitary "village guard" cadres -- DYP M.P. Mehmet Tatar 
from nearby Hakkari being one prominent example.  He asserted 
to us March 17 that: (1) the USG supports not only the 
northern Iraqi Kurds but indirectly the terrorist PKK and 
Turkish "Hizbullah" (comment: the latter in fact created by 
the security forces to combat Kurdish "separatism." End 
comment); (2) he has presented files detailing alleged 
nefarious USG activities to both TGS and President Sezer, 
"who are very worried about the emergence on an independent 
Kurdish state"; (3) Turkey should invade northern Iraq on its 
own to protect Turkish interests; and (4) he, personally, 
with his "thousands" of village guards, is "the guarantor of 
the Turkish State" in his chunk of the southeast. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) The Iraq question has brought to the fore how little 
Ankara has done throughout the life of the Republic of Turkey 
to address the political, economic, and social questions of a 
significant number of citizens who are ever more aware of 
their Kurdishness. 
PEARSON