This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/03/2013 
TAGS: ELAB EPET ENRG PGOV ASEC CASC NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: STRIKE SITREP DAY 5 - 1200 JULY 4 
 
 
REF: A. A) ABUJA 1162 
     ¶B. B) ABUJA 1157 
     ¶C. C) ABUJA 1147 
     ¶D. D) ABUJA 1135 
     ¶E. E) ABUJA 1107 
     ¶F. F) ABUJA 1091 
 
 
 CLASSIFIED BY A/DCM BRIAN L. BROWNE; REASON: 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The strike continued for a fifth day.  Thus 
far, Abuja is quiet but there is a possibility of 
demonstrations after Juma,at prayers this afternoon )- not 
only in Abuja but in other Northern cities as well.  There 
were no demonstrations in Abuja yesterday, but peaceful 
demonstrations were held elsewhere in the country. 
Apparently, Vice President Atiku has gotten involved and is 
taking an active, if not the leading, role as the GON 
negotiator with the NLC.  There continued to be conflicting 
reports whether the sides are nearer to agreement.  The 
President called a special meeting of senior officials to 
discuss the crisis late this morning.  Prices for fuel and 
transportation continue to rise. End Summary 
 
 
¶2. (U) This morning, Abuja has been quiet.  Gas lines remain 
lengthy and transportation prices have risen steeply, making 
it hard for many average Nigerians to move about.  Most 
businesses, including banks, remain understaffed and offer 
only minimal services.  There is a potential for 
demonstrations after Juma,at prayer in Abuja and in other 
northern cities this afternoon. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Peaceful demonstrations took place on Thursday in some 
cities, with the largest in Calabar.  There were no reports 
of any confrontations with police.  As opposed to the 
previous three days of the strike, there was no demonstration 
in Abuja.  A police source told Poloff that there have been 
numerous arrests in the Abuja area of labor and student 
leaders. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Vice President Abubakar Atiku apparently assumed a 
leading role on the GON side of the negotiations in Thursday 
night,s talks with National Labor Congress leaders.  There 
were conflicting reports as to the degree of success in the 
talks.  Some reports claimed NLC Leader Adams Oshiomole 
stated the strike would end on Friday, while others claimed 
the negotiators would take Friday off and talks would resume 
on Saturday.  Either way, an emergency meeting was scheduled 
at the Presidential Villa for 1100 today. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Fuel and transportation prices continue to rise.  The 
price per liter of gasoline in Abuja was reported as high as 
naira 250.  There have been reports of transportation costs 
in some areas reaching nearly ten times last week,s prices. 
There is also concern that farmers, particularly in the 
remote Northern agricultural areas, are losing already scant 
income because they cannot afford the much higher 
transportation costs being charged as a result of the price 
hike and the strike. 
 
 
¶6. (U) NUPENG and PENGASSEN still plan to join the strike 
this weekend if talks do not produce an agreement. 
 
 
¶7. (C) COMMENT: All Nigerians are feeling the pinch of the 
strike and most people are hoping that it ends today. 
However, for this to be resolved today, both labor and the 
GON will have to give in more than they would like.  Atiku,s 
involvement may signal the GON is willing to take a more 
flexible tact.  Atiku,s insinuation into the process may 
give the GON and Obasanjo a graceful way to relax its 
hard-line position.  It may also put Atiku on the hot seat if 
the talks break down. 
JETER 
JETER