This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T RANGOON 001390 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NP, EAP, EUR/PRA, AND EUR/RUS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/02/2013 
TAGS: PARM KNNP PREL BM RS
SUBJECT: RUSSIA-BURMA NUCLEAR ISSUE 
 
REF: MOSCOW 16988 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN M. MARTINEZ; REASON 1.5(b and d). 
 
¶1.  (S) Russian Ambassador Oleg Kabanov told EAP/BCLTV 
Director Judith Strotz and DCM October 22 that Russia's 
proposal to sell a nuclear research reactor to Burma was 
"basically frozen," adding that Burmese students are in 
Russia studying (at Burmese expense) nuclear engineering and 
technology.  Kabanov said he raised the potential reactor 
deal with senior GOB officials twice in the last eighteen 
months and was told both times, "we'll get back to you." 
Kabanov indicated Russia was eager and willing to conclude a 
sales deal, and professed that if the deal were to go 
forward, all IAEA standards and safeguards would apply.  All 
this tracks closely with Embassy Moscow's October 22 
discussion with Minatom, reftel.  When asked if some third 
country could possibly have concluded a sales agreement with 
Burma in the meantime and perhaps even begun construction, 
Kabanov said he didn't know. (Note: media, embassy, and 
other-source reporting suggests that construction on some 
sort of nuclear facility may have already begun.  These 
reports are yet to be verified.  End Note) 
 
¶2. (S) Director Strotz reiterated USG concern regarding 
reports of Burma's unregulated nuclear aspirations in light 
of Burmese interest in acquiring weapons from North Korea. 
 
¶3. (C) The Russian ambassador also said Russian mechanics 
maintain the Burmese Air Force MIG-29s under the terms of an 
after-sales service contract.  He said no Russians fly the 
MIGs, they only maintain them.  "I am happy to report that so 
far none of them have crashed," he said with a grin.  When 
the contract is up, the aircraft technicians depart, the 
ambassador stated, unless the contract is renewed or extended. 
Martinez