This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 001572 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/BCLTV; 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM BM NLD
SUBJECT: BURMA: REGIME RELEASES ADDITIONAL MAY 30 DETAINEES 
 
REF: A. RANGOON 1518 
 
     ¶B. RANGOON 1444 
     ¶C. RANGOON 1431 
 
Classified By: P/E Chief Murphy for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  The SPDC acknowledged on December 5 that it 
had recently released up to 16 NLD party members who had been 
detained in connection with the May 30 Depeyin attack.  By 
the regime's own admission, 14 individuals associated with 
the attack remain in detention.  The regime's decision to 
release more detainees is not purely humanitarian, but rather 
may be the result of a quiet dialogue with ASSK and/or an 
effort to ensure a warm reception at several upcoming 
international forums.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) During a December 5 press conference to unexpectedly 
announce new money laundering regulations (septel), the SPDC 
verified international press reports that the regime had 
released as many as 16 NLD party members.  The group of 16 
activists, all members of the NLD youth division, had 
provided security for ASSK and her convoy during a swing 
through northern Burma and were detained following the May 30 
Depeyin attack. 
 
¶3. (C) For the past six months, the 16 NLD members have been 
detained in Hkamti prison, a remote town in northern Sagaing 
Division, and were apparently released on December 2. 
According to NLD sources, however, the released party members 
are at the mercy of local government authorities for 
transportation out of their remote location and only a few 
have been able to contact their families.  As of December 5, 
the NLD was able to verify the release of only eight party 
members, but found credible the government's claim that a 
total of 16 had been released. 
 
¶4. (SBU) During the recent visit of U.N. Special Rapporteur 
Pinheiro (ref C), the human rights envoy pressed the SPDC for 
the release of 35 specific political detainees, most of whom 
were NLD party members detained in connection with the May 30 
convoy.  The regime released eight of the detainees on 
November 9 (ref B), leaving 27 on the Pinheiro-NLD list.  The 
SPDC now claims that with the latest release of 16 prisoners, 
only 14 individuals associated with the May 30 attack remain 
in detention.  By NLD calculations, which correspond with the 
SPDC figures, 11 party members are still held in Sagaing 
jails, including NLD Vice Chairman U Tin Oo, and three NLD 
CEC members remain under house arrest in Rangoon (U Lwin, U 
Aung Shwe, and Aung San Suu Kyi). 
 
¶5. (U) According to NLD sources, the following party youth 
members were released o/a December 2: 
 
--Myo Nyunt (Rangoon). 
 
--Myo Thaw, aka Ko Pauk (Rangoon). 
 
--Myint Kyaw (Rangoon). 
 
--Thet Tun (Rangoon). 
 
--Kwaw Zin Win (Irrawaddy). 
 
--Toe Lwin (Irrawaddy; believed to have suffered serious head 
injuries on May 30). 
 
--Min Lwin (Mandalay). 
 
--Myint Wai (unknown hometown). 
 
¶6. (U) According to NLD sources, the following party youth 
members were held at Hkamti prison and were likely among 
those released o/a December 2: 
 
--Tun Myint (Rangoon) 
 
--Than Tun (Rangoon) 
 
--Myo Zaw Aung (Mandalay) 
 
--Aung Naing (Mandalay) 
 
--Than Htay (Mandalay) 
 
--Aung Kyaw Oo (Mandalay) 
 
--Zaw Win Tun (Mandalay) 
 
--Kyaw Soe Linn (Mandalay) 
 
¶7.  (S) Comment:  The SPDC's motives for releasing NLD 
detainees (and issuing long-awaited money laundering 
regulations; septel) are clearly not humanitarian.  First, 
there are credible reports that ASSK has continued to press 
her SPDC interlocutors for the release of her colleagues, the 
reopening of NLD offices, and a full investigation of the May 
30 attack.  The regime may be trying to meet her part of the 
way in order to continue a quiet dialogue and head off a 
renewed public standoff, in which ASSK could regain regional 
sympathies.  Secondly, the regime is preparing to defend its 
road map for democracy at several upcoming forums, including 
the Japan-ASEAN summit in Tokyo December 11-12 and a 
Thai-sponsored Burma meeting on December 15.  Releasing NLD 
party members, who were the victims of a brutal attack, 
increases the likelihood of a warm reception at those venues. 
 End Comment. 
Martinez