This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, PM, PM/HDP 
 
NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PARM PHUM PREF EAID CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  ACTION REQUEST:  Demining assistance for 
Sri Lanka 
 
Refs:  (A) Colombo-SA/INS 01/02/03 Fax 
 
-      (B) 02 Colombo 2022, and previous 
 
¶1.  (U) This message is Sensitive but Unclassified -- 
Please handle accordingly.  Message contains an 
**ACTION REQUEST** -- Please see Para 8. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Mines/UXO are a serious problem in 
Sri Lanka.  After a very successful stint, the U.S.- 
sponsored QRDF program ended operations in late 2002. 
Mission has recently learned that a follow-on demining 
program involving DoD-run training has been postponed. 
We request that Washington continue to push hard for the 
implementation of this program.  We also request that 
Department examine putting in place other programs, such 
as the Marshall Legacy Institute's Mine Dog Program.  We 
believe strongly that demining reinforces U.S. policy 
goals in Sri Lanka, and request that Department initiate 
a bottom-up review of how we can re-establish our 
presence in this key area ASAP.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3.  (U) SCOPE OF PROBLEM:  Sri Lanka has a serious 
mine/unexploded ordnance (UXO) problem.  According to 
UNDP estimates, there are an estimated 100-150,000 mines 
in Jaffna.  There also could be up to 400,000 mines in 
the Wanni region in the north, which is controlled by 
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  The degree 
of the problem in the east is not clear, but there are 
believed to be some mines and significant UXO.  The UN 
estimates that 10-20 Sri Lankans are killed or injured 
in mine/UXO accidents each month.  There are fears that 
these figures could spike due to the steady return of 
displaced persons (IDP's) to points of origin in the 
north and east.  (Note:  Since the peace process began 
in December 2001, over 230,000 IDP's have returned to 
their home areas and the figure continues to surge 
upwards.) 
 
¶4.  (U) U.S. EFFORTS:  After approximately seven months 
of operation, the U.S.-sponsored Quick Reaction Demining 
Force (QRDF) wrapped up its work in Jaffna in late 
October 2002.  At the completion of its operations, the 
QRDF had cleared to international humanitarian demining 
standards approximately 122,000 square meters, and 
removed 980 mines and 42 pieces of UXO.  As reviewed in 
Ref B, the QRDF effort received widespread acclaim in 
Sri Lanka.  While performing practical work that is 
allowing for the safe return of displaced persons to 
demined areas, the QRDF became a symbol of our support 
for the GSL's peace initiative and garnered highly 
positive press coverage for the U.S. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The QRDF program was especially impressive in 
light of the fact that other donors have been slow to 
assist Sri Lanka, mainly because the GSL has not signed 
the Ottawa Convention banning the use of mines.  While 
showing some signs of life of late, the UN program has 
yet to get off the ground in any significant way.  In 
the meantime, the GSL and LTTE are implementing demining 
programs, but neither side is well-trained nor capable 
of clearing land to international humanitarian demining 
standards. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) NEXT STEPS:  With the QRDF's departure, the 
next step in U.S. demining assistance was supposed to be 
a large-scale DoD-run training program for Sri Lankan 
military personnel and civilians, which was publicly 
slated to start as early as January 2003.  The Sri 
Lankan government had signed off on this program and was 
looking forward to its start-up.  We now understand, 
however, that implementation of this program has been 
postponed until later this year because personnel 
resources are needed elsewhere.  While Mission 
understands there are other pressing needs 
internationally, Mission requests that Department 
continue to push hard for the implementation of the DoD- 
run program as soon as possible. 
 
¶7.  (U) Mission also requests that Washington examine 
putting in place other demining programs, such as the 
Mine Detection Dog Partnership Program proposed by the 
Marshall Legacy Institute (MLI).  MLI President Perry 
Baltimore recently visited Sri Lanka and discussed his 
organization's proposed program with Mission, and 
government and international organization 
representatives.  MLI's proposal seemed extremely 
sensible and was very well-received.  (Note:  Mission 
has sent SA/INS a fax containing MLI's latest update on 
its proposal.)  In addition to the MLI proposal, we 
request that Department review other possible demining 
programs that could be implemented in Sri Lanka in short 
order -- and at least in the interim until the DoD-run 
training program is up-and-running. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) COMMENT AND ACTION REQUEST:  We believe 
strongly that demining reinforces our foreign and 
humanitarian policy goals in Sri Lanka by providing 
"quick impact" support for the peace process.  Along the 
lines set out in Paras 6-7, we request that Department 
initiate a bottom-up review of how the U.S. can re- 
establish a presence in this key area ASAP.  We would 
like to brief the GSL very soon on U.S. plans and would 
appreciate a response on what is feasible by January 15. 
END COMMENT AND ACTION REQUEST. 
 
¶9.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS