This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T TEGUCIGALPA 002162 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT, DS, INR, EB/TRA, WHA, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/11/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC PREL EAIR HO
SUBJECT: POSSIBLE AL-QAIDA AVIATION THREAT TO THE U.S. 
(S/ES 200322654) 
 
REF: STATE 258046 
 
¶1. (S) Post demarched key GOH officials in several ministries 
September 10 with reftel information concerning a possible 
Al-Qaida aviation threat to the U.S.: 
 
-- PolOff delivered reftel talking points to MFA Director 
General for Foreign Affairs Mario Fortin who said he would 
immediately forward the information to the Ministry of the 
Presidency.  Fortin emphasized that Honduras would do 
whatever it could to assist the U.S. in the war against 
terrorism. 
 
-- EconOff delivered reftel talking points to Cesar Vasquez, 
Director of Civil Aviation.  Vasquez emphasized that Honduran 
aviation authorities are already operating at a level of 
heightened security awareness, and asked if there were 
specific actions that the USG was requesting.  EconOff 
reiterated that officials should review their current 
security posture, specifically with regard to flights which 
might be used in the kind of attacks described.  The issue 
will be discussed further with visiting TSA Representative 
Victor Guardia at an airport security meeting already planned 
for September 11th.  (Note:  In addition to direct flights to 
Houston and Miami (daily) and New Orleans (four times a 
week), the following commercial aircraft depart Honduras: an 
Airbus 320 daily to El Salvador, a Boeing 737 twice a week to 
Nicaragua, and a Boeing 737 daily to Costa Rica.  A chartered 
flight also flies once or twice a month from the island of 
Roatan to Milan, Italy.  There are no direct commercial 
flights from Honduras to Canada or Europe. End Note.) 
 
-- Law Enforcement Program Coordinator delivered reftel 
talking points to Minister of Public Security Oscar Alvarez. 
Alvarez said he would order increased checkpoints in border 
regions, placing extra emphasis on travelers' origin, 
destinations, and travel documents.  He also plans to meet 
with airport officials to place extra security measures at 
international airports in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.  He 
will place U.S.-trained Frontier Police at airport boarding 
gates to do random questioning and searches, and will 
encourage airlines to advise the Frontier Police when a 
suspicious person or persons with suspicious travel plans 
purchase tickets or check-in. 
 
¶2. (S) The Ambassador is seeking a meeting with President 
Ricardo Maduro to discuss this and other issues.  President 
Maduro returned September 10 from a short trip to the U.S. 
 
¶3. (S) Minister Alvarez also said that he has stepped up 
police protection for the U.S. and British Embassies from now 
through the weekend, due to the 9/11 anniversary. 
PALMER