This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ZAGREB 002173 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NP AND T 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP MNUC PARM PREL PHSA PBTS HR NATO
SUBJECT: CROATIA SUPPORTS PSI 
 
REF: A. ZAGREB 2047 
     ¶B. STATE 272470 
 
¶1.  On September 18, at a meeting with representatives of 
embassies of all eleven PSI states, Croatia's Foreign 
Ministry made an informal declaration of support for PSI 
principles, but asked questions about the legal framework for 
PSI and about plans for PSI infrastructure (ref a).  After 
receipt of additional information (ref b), Croatia's Foreign 
Ministry delivered a formal paper on October 7 (full text at 
para 2 below) in which it declares full support for the 
initiative, readiness to cooperate with PSI states and seeks 
to participate in PSI exercises in the Mediterranean. 
 
¶2.  Begin text of Croatian paper on PSI 
 
POSITION-PAPER ON PROLIFERATION SECURITY INITIATIVE 
 
The Republic of Croatia as a democratic and peace-oriented 
country is deeply engaged in both regional and global 
disarmament and non-proliferation issues. The intensifying of 
transnational threats throughout Europe and elsewhere, global 
terrorism, organized crime as well as refugee crises, 
narcotics smuggling, trafficking in human beings and illegal 
migrations have had both a direct and indirect influence on 
the national security of Croatia. Being situated in an area 
where some smuggling routes from Asia, Africa and Eastern 
Europe converge and cross into Western Europe, Croatia has 
recognized this potential threat and is making it an 
imperative to combat.  For this reason, strengthening and 
raising the efficiency of Croatia's border management and 
security system is amongst the priorities for the Government. 
 
Croatia adopted a Law on the Production, Maintenance and 
Trafficking of Arms and Military Equipment, and the Control 
of Export of Dual Use Goods Act is ready to enter the 
parliamentary procedure.  Croatian Government has on 9 May 
2002 accepted the criteria contained in the EU Code of 
Conduct for Arms Exports. 
 
With regard to weapons of mass destruction non-proliferation 
on an international level, Croatia is a party to and active 
participant in all the major international conventions 
dealing with WMD.  This includes the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT); the Convention on the 
Prohibition of Biological and Toxin Weapons; the Convention 
on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; and the Comprehensive 
Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT).  Also, Croatia works closely 
with the International Atomic Energy Agency on many issues in 
its sphere of responsibility, such as with the 
implementations of the Convention on the Physical Protection 
of Nuclear Material. 
 
Annex III Lists 1, 2 and 3 of the Ordinance on Goods Subject 
to Import and Export Licensing regulates the issuance of 
import/export licenses for goods which fall under the list of 
substances relating to the Convention on the Prohibition of 
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical 
Weapons and on their Destruction. Import/export licenses for 
substances included in the above mentioned lists are granted 
by the Ministry of Economy. 
 
As a State Party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and in accordance with the Protocol 
Additional to the Agreement between the Republic of Croatia 
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the 
Application of Safeguards in connection with the NPT (Annex 
II) and the Decree on Goods Subject to Import and Export 
Licensing, the import and export of nuclear materials and 
specified equipment on nuclear materials or the use of 
nuclear materials are subject to licensing. Import/export 
licenses for these materials and equipment are issued by the 
Ministry of Economy. 
 
Unfortunately, as September 11 has proved, not all WMD 
threats involve the use of chemical/biological/nuclear 
weapons.  To combat these threats we believe that all 
necessary efforts should be put into establishing much closer 
interstate cooperation between partner countries, especially 
in the exchange of real-time information. Timely exchange of 
information could have a decisive effect on possible 
terrorist activities. Croatia's firm position is that only 
through working together with its partners and allies can the 
spread of weapons of mass destruction, missiles and other WMD 
delivery systems be fought effectively. 
 
Taking into account all stated above, Croatia fully supports 
 
the work of Proliferation Security Initiative as described in 
the non-paper presented to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 
18 September 2003 by the representatives of Australia, 
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, 
Spain, UK and USA. 
 
Croatia is ready to cooperate with the countries participants 
of PSI within the scope of the Initiative and in accordance 
with the national legislation and international law. 
 
Croatia has so far been exchanging information with its 
partners regarding the proliferation of weapons through its 
territory and will continue to observe possible "suspicious" 
cargos in its ports, seas, roads or airspace. 
 
Croatia has interest to participate in the exercises within 
the PSI as an observer state. We are especially interested in 
the activities planned to take place in the Mediterranean 
Sea. 
 
End text. 
FRANK 
 
 
NNNN