This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000243 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2013 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PREL YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: ROYG RAID NETS EXTREMIST SUSPECT MOHAMMED ALI 
AL-ZAIDI 
 
Classified By: Political/Economic Officer Willeah E. Cato for Reasons 1 
.5 (b,d) 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Begin summary:  On Wednesday, January 29th, Yemeni 
security forces arrested Mohammed Ali Al-Zaidi, a suspect in 
both the July 27, 2001 kidnapping of German diplomat Rainer 
Berns and attacks on government institutions in the Marib 
governorate.  Al-Zaidi was wounded during a gunfight with 
security forces prior to his arrest and is currently under 
guard at a medical clinic in Marib.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  On January 29th Yemeni security forces apprehended 
Mohammed Ali Al-Zaidi, after a shoot-out in which a Yemeni 
soldier was killed, another wounded, and both Al-Zaidi and a 
relative, Ghalib Abdullah Al-Zaidi, were wounded. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Al-Zaidi is currently receiving medical treatment at 
Al-Wasit clinic in Marib under the guard of Yemeni security 
forces, but, according to the media, the situation on the 
ground remains "very tense".  Reportedly, both the tribes of 
Jiham and Murad refuse to allow Yemeni authorities to take 
Al-Zaidi out of Marib, and have threatened to fire on the 
soldiers if they try to take him by force. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Comment:  Al-Zaidi is described by numerous 
publications as a dangerous individual, who has spent time in 
Afghanistan and organized meetings for extremists. Yemeni 
security officials and a senior staffer for President Saleh 
have contacted the Embassy to draw attention to the Zaidi 
operation as a significant counter-terrorism success.  An 
advisor to Saleh told the DCM that Mohammed Ali Zaidi was 
considered "one of the most dangerous al-Qaeda elements left 
in Yemen."  The German Embassy also called to clarify 
Al-Zaidi's position on our most wanted list, and to ask about 
his background.  Al-Zaidi was not, and is not, on any list of 
individuals wanted by U.S. authorities as far as post is 
aware.  Information available at post indicates Zaidi has had 
contacts with known al-Qaeda figures, but does not confirm 
that he himself had been an al-Qaeda operative. 
Nevertheless, the successful Yemeni raid is an important 
security success, and signals ROYG resolve to act against 
extremists.  End comment. 
MISENHEIMER