This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 000475 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV; EAP/PD KFOSTER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS VM
SUBJECT:  AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW INSTITUTE OF 
--          INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS DIRECTOR 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY:  In a February 26 courtesy call, 
Ambassador Trinh Quang Thanh, the new Director General of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) Institute of 
International Relations (IIR), told Ambassador Burghardt 
that IIR "greatly appreciates" Embassy Hanoi's support and 
looks forward to a continued and expanded cooperative 
relationship.  Thanh expressed interest in receiving help 
from FSI in developing a course for senior GVN diplomats. 
Ambassador said that the embassy would welcome more 
engagement with IIR.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  (U)  Ambassador Burghardt paid a courtesy call on new 
IIR General Director Trinh Quang Thanh on February 26. 
Prior to assuming the IIR post, Ambassador Thanh was 
Vietnam's ambassador to Canada (1999-2002; worked in the 
MFA's Policy Planning Division (1990-1999); and served in 
the MFA's Europe I Division (1972-1989).  He holds a BA from 
Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic and an MA from 
Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies 
(SAIS). 
 
------------- 
WHAT IIR DOES 
------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  The GVN established IIR in 1977 and tasked it with 
doing research on international affairs and training the 
MFA's diplomats.  In Department of State terms, IIR can be 
viewed as a MFA combination of FSI and INR.  Current 
enrollment is about 1,100 students.  According to Ambassador 
Thanh, about twenty percent of IIR graduates actually end up 
working in the MFA; most land in other GVN ministries or in 
external relations offices within provincial governments. 
 
¶4.  (U)  IIR's research component consists of three 
divisions:  (1) North America/Europe; Northeast Asia; and 
Southeast Asia.  There are approximately 25 researchers who 
do research projects for the MFA.  Some projects are self- 
generated, while others are done upon request.  A number of 
researchers have access to classified information, according 
to Ambassador Thanh, and many also have concurrent teaching 
responsibilities.  Ambassador Thanh said that during his 
tenure, he envisions IIR assuming more of a "think tank" 
role, focusing on Vietnam's activities within the regional 
context. 
 
---------------- 
STRONG RELATIONS 
---------------- 
 
¶5.  (U)  Strong ties already exist between IIR and US 
institutions.  The Ford Foundation and Asia Foundation both 
support scholarships for students to study in the U.S. 
and/or bring in guest lecturers from the U.S.  Ambassador 
Thanh noted that IIR researchers/instructors have studied at 
Columbia, Johns Hopkins/SAIS, Notre Dame, Tufts University 
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, St. Johns, and the 
University of Hawaii. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Ambassador Thanh said that he "very much 
appreciates" the support of the US embassy for IIR.  He also 
invited Ambassador Burghardt for another roundtable 
discussion, similar to one held in 2002.  Reaction among the 
students who attended was "very positive," noted Ambassador 
Thanh.  Ambassador Burghardt said that he would also welcome 
expanded cooperation, including more guest speakers from the 
U.S. and would look forward to another roundtable. 
 
--------------------- 
SENIOR LEVEL TRAINING 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U)  While IIR trains young and mid-level diplomats, 
there is currently no training at the senior level. 
Ambassador Thanh said that he plans to develop such a course 
and would like to learn more about FSI's approach. 
Ambassador Burghardt agreed that it would be useful to 
implement such training and said that he would inquire how 
FSI could help. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (U)  While the relationship between the embassy and IIR 
is already quite strong, Ambassador Thanh appears genuinely 
interested in expanding it. Although at times IIR 
researchers have been fearful of attending PAS programs on 
"sensitive" topics such as U.S. policy towards Iraq or North 
Korea, there are elements within the institution, which 
consider the contact useful.  This relationship is worth 
nurturing and embassy will continue to work with IIR towards 
the goal of expanding USG contacts among a significant group 
of well-educated men and women who have a good chance of 
moving into future policy making positions.  BURGHARDT