This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LAGOS 000637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
 
CAIRO FOR MAXSTADT, TASHKENT FOR BURKHALTER, PARIS FOR 
OECD/IEA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2013 
TAGS: EPET PINS ASEC PGOV PARM PHUM NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA:  A CONVERSATION WITH ONE IJAW 
 
 
REF: A. EMAIL SCHWEIKERT/BROWNE MARCH 22 
     ¶B. LAGOS 505 
     ¶C. ABUJA 448 
     ¶D. ABUJA 449 
     ¶E. LAGOS 504 
 
 
Classified By: CONSUL GENERAL ROBYN HINSON-JONES. 
  REASON 1.5 (C) AND (D). 
 
 
1.(C) Summary:  In a March 25 telecon with EconOff, Aziboala 
Robert, President of Niger Delta Human and Environmental 
Rescue Organization (ND-HERO), discussed the ongoing crisis 
in the Niger Delta. End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) ND-HERO President Azibaola Robert, an Ijaw from 
Bayelsa State, whose headquarters are in Port Harcourt, 
Rivers State said that the Ijaws have planned massive 
protests in the major cities, to include Port Harcourt, 
Warri, and possibly Abuja to focus on their concerns.  The 
dates of the demonstrations are still to be determined, but, 
they could take place in the next few days.  The concerns are 
land ownership, ward delineation, oil revenue and voter 
registration.  Although the demonstrations failed to begin on 
March 23 as Robert had predicted, he said tensions are high 
within the Ijaw community and he fears that the 
confrontations could escalate into all of the states with 
Ijaw populations - Bayelsa, Delta, Rivers and even to Akwa 
Ibom. 
 
 
¶3. (C) According to Robert, Delta State Governor Ibori tried 
to diffuse the tensions, but the rumor of in-house  political 
problems between the Governor and his Peoples Democratic 
Party gave the appearance of a government not in control of 
the security forces not to mention the youth.  Bayelsa State 
government officials have also been ineffectual in arresting 
the crisis and, Robert stated, there is no a clear directive 
from the Ijaw leaders.  According to Robert, the elders and 
leaders lack the capacity to get out to the villages and 
out-lying areas to talk to the Ijaw youth.  He said that on 
one occasion an attempt was made to capture Ijaws suspected 
of causing problems. Community persons worked with the 
military only to find themselves targeted by the same 
military.  The Ijaws were arrested for having arms that were 
originally supplied by military to aid them in capturing Ijaw 
criminal suspects.  Based on that experience, Ijaws are 
skeptical about the military's intentions. 
 
 
¶4. (C)  Robert speculated that arms may be entering Nigeria 
from neighboring countries, in particular Cameroon via a 
direct sea route.  He further speculated that some of the 
monies paid by oil companies to the Ijaws as direct 
compensation or ransom may be used to purchase arms. 
According to Robert, the more arms and ammunition, the better 
their bargaining power.  He does not think that wealthy 
individuals either in Nigeria or abroad are supplying the 
arms for their own nefarious purposes. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Robert does believe, however, that wealthy people are 
working with sea pirates, robbers and criminals who sabotage 
the pipelines.  When the criminals are apprehended by the 
military, they are usually released quickly with only a small 
fine imposed. He added that in some cases, the military have 
stopped arresting people connected to certain prominent 
individuals.  He claimed to be aware of some of the 
individuals involved but would not name them. 
 
 
¶6. (C) The GON has recently stated that Shell Petroleum 
Development Company Nigeria Limited (SPDC) should pay the 
Ijaws of Bayelsa State USD 1.5bn  in compensation for the 
degradation to their lands and corresponding social and 
physical ills. Robert stated that his contact at SPDC told 
him that the company will not pay.   This is a sleeper issue 
that it is not yet finished, but, he predicted that there 
could be a serious conflict before the matter is resolved. 
 
 
¶7. (C) Robert said that the recent attack on the home of 
MOSOP President Ledum Mitee (Ref A) has all of the markings 
of an assassination attempt and not a robbery since no 
property was taken.  Mitee was not at home during the 
attempt.  Mitee is connected with various human rights groups 
in Port Harcourt. According to Robert, many people are 
unhappy with Mitee.  One week before Mitee went abroad, he 
was invited by GON's State Security Service for "a chat". 
According to Robert, Mitee was increasingly voicing concerns 
about the GON. He spoke on 93.7 radio about the murder of 
Marshall Harry (Reftels B and E), the late South-South Zonal 
Vice Chairman of the All Nigerian People's Party.  In 
addition, he has issued press statements about issues 
concerning the Ogoni and the GON.  He is also not in good 
odor in Bayelsa State as he was the attorney in the 
corruption case against Chief Diepreye Alameyeseigha, the 
Governor of Bayelsa State. 
 
 
¶8. (C) During the conversation with EconOff, Robert noted 
that the Ijaws' grievances are with the GON and not the oil 
companies.  International oil companies, however, are a means 
to reach the GON where it hurts-in the pocketbook.  He 
predicted that an early end to the crisis is not likely to be 
forthcoming and that the Ijaws are planning further 
unspecified action.  Post will continue close monitoring of 
the crisis and its potential forlong-term  impact on the oil 
sector. 
HINSON-JONES