This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
GUATEMALA FOR COMATT: DTHOMPSON 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS SENV ETRD ECON HO
SUBJECT: GOH RESPONSE TO TEDS VERIFICATION REPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 06760 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Per reftel request, on January 13, Econoff 
delivered demarche talking points to Vice Minister of 
Agriculture German Perez on the outcome of the December 
visit to the island of Roatan by USG fisheries officials to 
inspect Honduras' TEDs program and the plans to de-certify 
Honduras to export commercially harvested shrimp to the U.S. 
The Ambassador had previously contacted President Maduro on 
January 9 to alert him of the possible de-certification. 
Perez blamed the lack of TEDs compliance on a change in 
government last February that resulted in a turnover in 
fisheries inspectors.  Perez reiterated the importance of 
shrimp exports to the Honduran economy and is eager to get 
their TEDs program back on track.  The GOH will formulate a 
proposal detailing their plans to strengthen the TEDs 
program and requesting additional TEDs training before USG 
fisheries officials return for another TEDs inspection. 
Perez remarked that they are interested in getting re- 
certified before the 2003 commercial shrimp season begins in 
July of 2003.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ambassador Palmer spoke with President Maduro the 
evening of January 9, alerting him that during a December 
inspection of Honduras' TEDs program, USG fisheries 
officials found major problems with the implementation of 
TEDS and that Honduras would most likely have its TEDs 
certification withdrawn, resulting in a ban on the 
exportation of commercially harvested shrimp to the U.S. 
Maduro appreciated the call, reiterated the importance of 
shrimp exports to the U.S. and promised to look into the 
matter. 
 
¶3. (U) Econoff met with Vice Minister of Agriculture German 
Perez on January 13 to deliver reftel demarche talking 
points and brief him on the TEDs team's findings.  Econoff 
encouraged Perez to consider formulating a proposal for a 
training program on the proper implementation and 
supervision of TEDs.  Perez had spoken with Roatan fisheries 
officials before the meeting to get a readout on the 
December inspection.  Perez suggested that the change in 
government last February resulted in a high turnover of 
personnel, including fisheries officials and inspectors in 
the Ministry of Agriculture, and that new employees have not 
been properly trained on TED's implementation and inspection 
procedures.  Perez also offered the weak argument that a 
culture of lawlessness exists on Roatan and that inspection 
officials are often intimidated into not performing their 
duties. 
 
¶4. (U) Perez responded enthusiastically about the prospects 
of receiving further TEDs training for fisheries officials, 
noting the importance of shrimp exports to the Honduran 
economy.  Post will continue to encourage the GOH to develop 
a plan to implement and regulate the use of TEDs on 
commercial fishing boats and will forward the Ministry's 
proposal for training as soon as it is received. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5. (U) The GOH feels they have a small window of opportunity 
to get their TEDs program back on line and get re-certified. 
The 2002 commercial shrimping season officially closes 
January 31, 2003, and the 2003 season is projected to open 
in early July, giving the GOH a five to six-month period to 
turn its TEDs program around.  Post notes that the GOH 
received TEDs training in 2001 and was subsequently re- 
certified to export commercially harvested shrimp.  While 
Post believes that GOH officials are sincere in their desire 
to be TEDs compliant, we recommend that USG fisheries 
officials make sure that the GOH takes the necessary 
measures to ensure that their TEDs program will remain 
compliant in the coming years.  End comment. 
 
PALMER