This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000805 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/17/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: TF1Z01: SANAA EAC MEETING APRIL 16 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Summary:  The Ambassador convened an Emergency 
Action Committee (EAC) meeting on April 16 to assess Embassy 
security posture and threat information.  The EAC decided to 
return to normal operations on April 19, and to formally 
request the cancellation of authorized departure -- to 
include the return of dependents to post.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)   Key offices and personnel represented at the 
4/16 EAC meeting included: ADMIN, AMB, CONS, DCM, FPD, OMC, 
ORCA, PD, POL/ECON, RMO and SOC YEMEN. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  ORCA reported no new threat information. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  RSO reported that there is no information on 
planned demonstrations this weekend.  RSO will monitor the 
situation and alert the Embassy community as warranted. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Imminent Suspension of MoveSafe Light 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Noting the end of major combat operations in Iraq, 
A/DCM raised two issues for EAC's consideration: ending 
MoveSafe Lite and returning to normal operations; and 
formally requesting an end to authorized departure.  RSO 
reported a request from the Ministry of Interior (MOI) for 
USG personnel to maintain the current level of security 
practices for 4-5 more days.  MOI recognizes that the 
situation in Yemen is improving considering the events in the 
region, but feels that a few more days of heightened security 
will allow for a greater easing of Yemeni popular opinion. 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  Regarding possible threats to the community, EAC 
discussed an MOI report of a road incident in which shots 
were fired at a Jordanian diplomat.  While the Jordanians 
believe their diplomat was specifically targeted, eye witness 
statements describe a vehicular confrontation ending in 
gunfire -- one shot fired into the air and one into the 
Jordanian's car.  The shot into the car impacted away from 
the Jordanian diplomat.  His vehicle did not have diplomatic 
plates.  The MOI is assessing this episode as a road-rage 
incident. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Unless credible new threat information becomes 
available, EAC agreed to go off of MoveSafe Lite on Saturday, 
April 19. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Cancellation of Authorized Departure 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (C)  Referring to an April 15 meeting in Washington to 
review the status of posts in the Gulf, A/DCM noted that the 
Department welcomes recommendations from posts in the region 
on whether to continue with authorized/ordered departure. 
 
¶9.  (C)  EAC decided to formally request the lifting of 
authorized departure (AD) with attendees noting the 
following: 
 
--  Informal polling of embassy personnel revealed general 
support for lifting AD because no one at post has used it; 
however, several post personnel have mentioned a perceived 
disconnect between returning to regular staffing while 
maintaining increased security. 
 
--  Addressing the "disconnect", attendees noted that 
increased security and use of armored vehicles has brought 
post to its target security posture.  This security will 
remain in place, even while ending AD, to deter future 
threats. 
 
--  AD complicates the day-to-day life of a mission, in 
particular with respect to travel of personnel to and from 
post, and, if no longer required by local and regional 
circumstances, should be discontinued as soon as possible. 
 
-------------------- 
Return of Dependents 
-------------------- 
¶10.  (C)  Turning to the issue of dependents at post, EAC 
members noted that a year ago, given circumstances in Yemen, 
the Department decided to allow spouses but no minor 
dependents to return to post.  With regional circumstances 
changing after the end of combat operations in Iraq - and 
with improving security conditions in Yemen - EAC members 
agreed to request that in conjunction with the lifting of 
authorized departure, the Department also approve the return 
of minor dependents to Sanaa -- as it presumably may be doing 
for other posts in the region. 
¶11.  (C)  Foreigners in Yemen have been targeted no more than 
at other posts in the region, and heightened security 
measures and ROYG's continued cooperation have been 
effective.  The Department's concurrence on the return of 
dependents to post in the near future would also give 
families the chance to make preparations without interfering 
with their children's education. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Escape of Ten Suspected Terrorists 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (S/NF)  EAC also discussed the security implications of 
the escape of 10 suspected al-Qaida terrorists from a ROYG 
facility in Aden with FPD rep raising the possibility that 
these 10 could pose an increased threat.  Noting that the USG 
was principally interested in 2 of the 10 for further 
investigation and prosecution, ORCA indicated that the other 
8 are not key terrorist activists, while they still merit 
observation.  ROYG is committed to the swift apprehension of 
the 10 and is working closely with the USG. 
 
HULL