This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 002246 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS, CA/OCS AND DS/IP/SA 
STATE PLEASE PASS PEACE CORPS 
STATE ALSO PASS USAID - ANE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC EAID CASC PREL NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  PEACE CORPS TRAINEES TO RETURN TO CAPITAL 
AFTER MAOIST THREAT 
 
 
Classified By: DCM ROBERT K. BOGGS.  REASON:  1.5 (B,D). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  Peace Corps Nepal has decided to transfer 
30 trainees participating in a 12-week program in Butwal, in 
the south central district of Rupandehi,and five other 
volunteers in that area back to Kathmandu following threats 
of possible "action" from local Maoist cadres.  The trainees 
will complete the remaining two weeks of their program in 
Kathmandu.  Peace Corps has activated its warden network, 
alerted local authorities, and ordered all other volunteers 
to remain at their sites and within access to telephones.  An 
Emergency Action Committee meeting has been called for the 
morning of November 18 to assess the situation.  Peace Corps 
Nepal is gathering further information on the threat and will 
consult with the Embassy on further steps.  End summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
MAOISTS THREATEN "ACTION" 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  In the afternoon of November 17 the Peace Corps 
office in Kathmandu received word from its training director 
in Butwal, Rupandehi District (located approximately 265 km 
southwest of Kathmandu in the lowland Terai region) that 
local Maoist cadres had told three local Peace Corps contacts 
in the area that all Americans associated with the Peace 
Corps had four days in which to leave Rupandehi.  (Note: 
Peace Corps has been conducting a 12-week training program 
for 30 new volunteers in Butwal since September 17.  End 
note.)  Should the Americans fail to heed the warning, an 
"announcement" would be posted on the Maoist website, and 
"action," including the possibility of "physical action," 
taken against them and those helping them.  The Maoists 
reportedly also threatened the three Peace Corps contacts 
(who are not employees but prominent local individuals who 
had been "facilitating" the training, e.g., assisting Peace 
Corps find housing for the trainees in the community) and 
their families, and said they would call back at 4:00 p.m. 
local time to hear what Peace Corps had decided. 
 
¶3.  (C) The Maoists reportedly had contacted the three Nepali 
"facilitators" individually  about one week earlier seeking 
information on the training program and its purpose.  At that 
time, they had told the local Peace Corps contacts that they 
wanted to meet with the Nepali training director, but then 
modified their instructions on November 17 to demand that 
Peace Corps leave the community completely. 
 
------------------ 
PEACE CORPS STEPS 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  (C)  On November 17 Peace Corps Nepal decided to pull 
back all 30 trainees and American staff, as well as one other 
volunteer stationed in Butwal and four other volunteers 
stationed in the adjoining district of Palpa, to Kathmandu 
immediately.  The trainees and volunteers will leave Butwal 
on November 18, spend the night in Narayangadh, Chitwan 
District, and arrive in Kathmandu on November 19.  Nepali 
administrative staff associated with the training program 
will remain behind one day to tie up loose ends and depart 
from Butwal on November 19.  The trainees will complete their 
program (scheduled to end on December 9) in Kathmandu. 
 
¶5.  (C) Peace Corps Nepal has contacted the Chief District 
Officer (CDO) in Rupandehi, as well as the Regional Security 
Administrator in Pokhara, Kaski District, to alert them of 
the situation, and plans to contact the CDO in Palpa before 
COB November 17.  As a precaution, Peace Corps has activated 
its warden system to advise all volunteers of the situation, 
and has upgraded its security assessment to the "stand fast" 
level, instructing all volunteers not in Rupandehi or Palpa 
District to remain at their sites, keeping a low profile and 
staying within easy access of a telephone.  Peace Corps plans 
to inform other international volunteer agencies operating in 
Nepal of this new development. 
 
------------ 
EAC MEETING 
------------ 
 
¶6.  (C)  The Embassy Emergency Action Committee will meet the 
morning of November 18 to review tripwires and to reassess 
the situation.  The Embassy will inform the Department by 
septel of the outcome of that meeting. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Peace Corps has conducted two previous training 
programs in Butwal without incident.  Since then, however, 
the Maoists' anti-American rhetoric has become increasingly 
shrill.  There is no information that other volunteers in 
other locations have been similarly threatened.  The Embassy 
and Peace Corps office will continue to monitor the situation 
closely to determine next steps. 
MALINOWSKI