This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 16 ABUJA 000515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPT ALSO PASS AID 
 
 
G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, AF/RA 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: A. STATE 22225, B. 02 ABUJA 02976, C. ABUJA 00159 
 
 
¶1.  The following is post's submission for the annual 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report.  Paragraphs below are 
keyed to questions in reftel.  Note: Post tried to confine 
material to respective sections, but several examples have 
overlapping relevance to the general overview, prevention, 
prosecution, and protection questions.  Details in each 
section have shared relevance with the others and are best 
reviewed as a whole. 
 
 
¶2.  OVERVIEW OF A COUNTRY'S ACTIVITIES TO ELIMINATE 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS: 
 
 
A and B.  Nigeria is a country of origin, transit, and 
destination for international trafficked men, women, and 
children.  Nigeria is primarily a point of origin, though it 
also serves as a significant transit area for trafficking in 
the sub-region.  To a lesser extent it is a destination 
point for young children from nearby West African countries. 
There is also a sizeable, but unquantifiable, internal 
trafficking network for forced labor and commercial sexual 
exploitation (CSE) within Nigeria.  While the majority of 
trafficking from Nigeria involves females destined for 
brothels in Southern Europe, estimated thousands of young 
males are trafficked to other African countries, including 
Gabon, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire and the 
Benin Republic, to work on farms or plantations.  Some 
children are coerced into prostitution.  Press reports claim 
18 children per month are repatriated from Gabon to 
Nigeria's eastern cities.  Authorities have identified 
another trafficking route of children through Katsina and 
Sokoto to the Middle East and East Africa.  This practice 
reflects historic slave trade routes between Sub-Saharan 
Africa and the Middle East.  Eastern Nigeria and Cross River 
and Akwa Ibom states have been the focus of trafficking of 
children for labor and, reportedly in some cases, human 
sacrifice.  Many children are sold for as little as $50.00, 
according to press sources.  There were credible reports in 
2002 that poor families sold their daughters into marriage 
as a means of supplementing their income.  Traffickers 
profited USD 50 to 1,500 or more per child, depending on the 
child's earnings. 
 
 
Sources of information regarding Nigerian involvement in the 
international sex trade, the largest "employer" of Nigerian 
trafficking victims, include press, government officials, 
NGOs, victims, transportation company personnel, law 
enforcement authorities, international aid agencies and 
diplomatic missions.  The UN International Office of 
Migration (IOM) estimates that as many as 300,000 Nigerian 
women were trafficked for CSE since 1997.  In May 2002, 
Minister of State Musa Elayo said that between 3,000 and 
4,000 Nigerian trafficking victims are repatriated annually 
and called for passage of the National Assembly's anti-TIP 
bill. The Italian Ambassador to Nigeria recently estimated 
that 18,000 Nigerians prostitutes currently in Italy were 
trafficking victims.  Nigeria and Italy signed and are 
implementing a bilateral agreement to protect and repatriate 
victims.  In the past four years, Italy and Nigeria have 
cooperated to repatriate over 1,500 such victims.  In June 
2002, 200 victims were deported to Nigeria.  On average now, 
there are about 50 women deported to Nigeria per week. 
While many had gone willingly to Italy, others were forced 
or duped by family members or criminal gangs or driven by 
dire economic conditions into the international sex 
industry.  Some believed they were going to work as 
waitresses or domestic staff, and were forced into 
prostitution in order to pay off the debt of being 
trafficked internationally.  Other significant receiving 
countries for trafficked Nigerians include the Netherlands, 
Spain and France.  In one glaring example, in 1999 a Dutch 
court convicted the former Ambassador of the Netherlands to 
Nigeria for providing visas to Nigerian women allegedly to 
engage in the commercial sex trade. 
 
 
¶C.  As in the 2002 report, fewer trafficking syndicates 
appear to be trafficking females to Europe via air routes. 
Instead, some are opting for the more circuitous but less 
scrutinized land routes across West Africa and the Sahara. 
This change appears to be caused by improved interdiction 
efforts by airlines, European diplomatic missions in 
Nigeria, and immigration authorities at European airports. 
The adoption of Shari'a-based legal systems by northern 
states resulted in the stronger enforcement of laws against 
child prostitution there.  However, NGOs and journalists 
have reported that Koranic scholars in the north are 
exploiting child labor, and many children are reportedly 
being trafficked to Saudi Arabia during the Hajj. 
Immigration estimates it sees about 20 cases of trafficking 
per month. 
 
 
¶D.  The extent and nature of trafficking in Nigeria has been 
studied and reported on by various sources listed above.  As 
stated last year, the ILO's International Program for the 
Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC) has conducted a regional 
study of child trafficking patterns in eight West African 
countries.  This excellent resource, part of a $4.3 million 
regional anti-trafficking project funded by USDOL, is 
available on the Internet at www.ilo.org.  Recent USAID and 
DOL studies based on surveys carried out by the 
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture explore 
Nigerian child labor in the cocoa industry.  A similar study 
produced by UNICEF (available at www.unicef.org) also 
provides quality information.  In 2001 UNICEF published a 
report called "Children's and Women's Rights in Nigeria: A 
Wake-up Call" (not available on the Web site).  The 
International Organization of Migration (IOM) funded a study 
by the University of Benin (Edo State, Nigeria) to ascertain 
the extent of the problem in Nigeria, but the report remains 
unpublished to date.  When released, this report may contain 
the most comprehensive data on trafficking within the 
country. 
 
 
¶E.  Most victims trafficked to Nigeria are young children 
from neighboring states, including Togo and Benin Republic. 
Thousands of children are also trafficked domestically. 
Girls are usually placed in homes as domestic servants; most 
boys become agricultural laborers.  Some of the children 
involved in this trade are incorporated into households, 
working as "wards."  A smaller number may be used to hawk 
goods on street corners or to beg.  Traffickers take 
advantage of a cultural tradition of "fostering," under 
which it is acceptable to send a child to live and work with 
a more prosperous family in an urban center in return for 
educational and vocational advancement.  Often the children 
in these situations only work and do not receive any formal 
education; however, many families who employ children as 
domestic servants also pay their school fees.  Other 
children are forced to hawk goods for their parents or 
guardians, selling nuts, fruits, and other items in the 
streets, at times amidst heavy traffic.  Fear of physical 
punishment, language barriers, and traditional religious 
practices are used to control victims.  Child workers also 
fear the deadly poverty that may befall a parent or other 
family member if he or she does not earn a living.  In 
countries such as Nigeria where many practice animism, the 
belief in "juju" curses and oaths has considerable effect on 
silencing children in forced labor. Ref B discusses child 
labor conditions further. 
 
 
¶F.  Traffickers target impoverished families in rural areas 
for child trafficking from Nigeria, particularly in Cross 
River, Akwa Ibom, Imo, Abia, and Ebonyi states.  Some 
children are trafficked for labor in Cameroon, Gabon, Benin 
Republic, and Equatorial Guinea to work in agricultural 
enterprises or as market traders.  (These children are also 
targeted for domestic trafficking as domestic servants in 
Abuja and Lagos.)  Nigeria's ministry of women's affairs 
estimates some 6,000 Nigerian children between ages 6 and 13 
are enslaved as farmhands and domestic servants in West 
Africa.  Some traffickers kidnapped children from school 
grounds; at least one such example was rescued by a family 
and returned to his family. 
 
 
Traffickers may be a distant relative or a friend of a 
friend, often called a "sponsor" or an "aunty," who 
approaches poor parents with promises of a better life for 
their child international or domestically in the home of a 
wealthy urban family.  Parents, ignorant of the conditions 
awaiting their child, often agree in exchange for a small 
sum or the promise of salary remittance.  Traffickers have 
also reportedly tried to have children in juvenile courts 
released to their custody, which has aroused the suspicions 
of a few alert magistrates in local courts. 
 
 
Children are sometimes trafficked through southeastern 
Nigeria through the riverine areas at night by small boats, 
locally referred to as "Ijaw Airways" (Ijaw and Itsekiri are 
reportedly common conductors of these passageways). 
Children are packed in boats or canoes and can spend days 
without food or water on the high seas to reach 
international destinations.  Some of these victims jump 
overboard; others die in boat accidents; some are reportedly 
shot by police upon arrival.  Documentation is not 
necessarily used, but falsified passports or illegitimately- 
issued genuine passports are also likely used (per 
experience in the U.S. visa section of the mission).  In 
Libreville, trafficked Igbo children are forced to hawk 
goods in markets, endure beatings, and receive little or no 
compensation.  Some child victims have grown to adulthood in 
these conditions; despite their desire to return to their 
native land, they cannot afford the exit visa fee and/or 
fines for having been in Gabon illegally. 
 
 
Traffickers mostly target young women for the 
international sex trade, but some are also used as drug 
couriers.  Edo is followed by Delta State as the main 
suppliers of Nigerian prostitutes for Italy. Anecdotal 
evidence suggests that Edo indigenes began migrating to 
Italy to work as migrant farm laborers several decades ago. 
These laborers began facilitating the travel of other Edo 
residents to Italy for work.  Some of these individuals 
became involved with drug trafficking and other criminal 
activities.  In the 1980s and 1990s, Nigerian criminal 
networks, primarily in Turin and Milan, began facilitating 
travel of young women for prostitution. Ironically, many 
traffickers are former victims who have paid off their 
madams and begun recruiting girls from their home areas to 
Italy.  Many traffickers prefer overland routes through 
Benin, Togo and Ghana.  Some victims then fly from Accra or 
Abidjan to Europe.  Others move overland to Conakry, then to 
Bamako, then to Algiers or Casablanca for sail across the 
Western Mediterranean to Spain.  Staying in safehouses along 
the way, the overland route takes two to three weeks, and 
many victims die of heat exhaustion in transit.  In 
addition, Kano's international airport is becoming a new hub 
for traffickers, given regular flight service from this 
airport to destinations in eastern Africa and the Middle 
East.  Victims are also being taken overland to Niger and 
Morocco or driven through Egypt to the Middle East and 
Europe. 
 
 
Many young women claim they are told they will perform work 
other than prostitution and then are forced into the sex 
trade once abroad. Other young women know they will be in 
the sex trade.  What most do not know are the horrendous 
conditions they will encounter. A Madam may pay a trafficker 
USD 12,000 per victim.  Many are not paid the salaries 
promised, forced into indentured servitude to repay 
smuggling fees as high as USD 50,000, and are subjected to 
physical and sexual abuse to keep them from alerting foreign 
law enforcement authorities.  The Madam may profit USD 
20,000 to 50,000 per victim.  Traffickers often use family 
pressure to ensure the victims' participation.  Nigerian 
crime syndicates may threaten or use indebtedness, beatings 
and/or rape, physical injury to or even murder of the 
victim's family members, arrest and deportation to persuade 
those forced into a life of servitude from attempting to 
escape.  Many trafficking victims are forced to undergo 
ritual cultural oaths of secrecy or are swayed with charms. 
Because belief in traditional religions is still maintained 
by a number of Nigerians, even those practicing Christianity 
or Islam, those juju rituals can keep many victims from 
contacting authorities about their abuse.  See also section 
H below. 
 
 
¶G.  Despite the significant efforts discussed throughout 
this report, the GON has been unable to comply with the 
minimum standards of the U.S. Trafficking Victims Protection 
Act (TVPA).  In the past year, the Federal Government showed 
no new commitment of resources to fighting TIP.  In June 
2002, the House of Representatives passed a draft anti- 
trafficking in persons bill.  The Senate passed the bill on 
February 6, 2003, and it now awaits President Obasanjo's 
signature into law. 
 
 
News reports alleged that the law would transform the Women 
Trafficking and Child Labour Eradication Foundation 
(WOTCLEF), an NGO founded by Amina Titi Atiku Abubakar, wife 
of Vice President Atiku, into a federally funded and staffed 
agency.  A source who testified at the Senate hearings on 
the bill denies any such provision is included in the law. 
On January 28, 2003, the House of Representatives ratified 
the United Nations Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish 
Trafficking in Persons.  On the same day, the House 
rescinded its previous decision (on October 30, 2002) which 
rejected the Child Rights Bill.  Public hearings on the bill 
will review and reconsider the bill, whose sections setting 
the minimum age for marriage at 18 are considered 
"offensive" to some Nigerian customs.  Despite the delay in 
passing this domestic law on child rights, Nigeria did 
ratify the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in the 
early 1990s. 
 
 
Although various laws have proscribed child labor in Nigeria 
continually since colonial times, in 2002 President Obasanjo 
signed the instruments of ratification for ILO Convention 
182, Worst Form of Child Labor, Convention 138, Minimum Age 
for Employment, and Convention 111, Equality of Occupation. 
President Obasanjo recognizes TIP as a threat to Nigeria and 
remains personally committed to the issue, frequently 
speaking out against it.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
has designated an office to handle TIP issues.  In 2002 the 
Government established an inter-ministerial Committee to 
Address TIP, but this committee lacked its own budget and 
oversaw no programs.  Police and immigration have dedicated 
TIP units.  The Police Anti-TIP Task Force of 10 officers in 
Lagos was created by the GON in 1999 to assist with the 
repatriation of trafficked victims and to build criminal 
cases against suspected traffickers.  Other anti-TIP units 
are located in eleven critical states, which the GON plans 
to staff with 100 officers.  Government programs for health, 
education and general social development, while not 
earmarked to address trafficking per se, indirectly do help 
address factors contributing to trafficking. 
 
 
¶H.  Post has received credible reports that individual 
government officials facilitate trafficking via passive 
complicity, lacking will to fight the problem, or by 
actively condoning the practice.  Corruption is common in 
Customs, the National Police Force and Immigration, where 
most personnel are underpaid and poorly trained.  Some 
repatriated TIP victims have alleged the active 
participation of Nigerian Immigration officials as a part of 
the trafficking syndicates.  Returnees have reported that 
they boarded flights to Italy for a fee ($10,000 to $15,000) 
without any passport or visa. 
 
 
In November 2002, the GON announced its investigation of a 
retired senior customs or immigration officer and two others 
suspected of trafficking children in Abuja.  Post's last 
information on this case showed the GON was searching for 
the suspects.  Allegations against the former official were 
made by an official in the Internal Affairs Ministry, who 
said he had "heard children crying in the night at [the 
suspects' addresses], then you would hear the sound of a 
vehicle going out of the premises and then you no longer 
hear the cries."  Many women are reportedly trafficked 
through neighboring countries using forged travel documents 
identifying them as non-Nigerians.  Ghana and Guinea serve 
as the main transit points using this method.  The arrest of 
15 Nigerian traffickers and rescue of 33 Nigerian women and 
girls in Conakry in 2001 revealed the major role Guinea 
plays as a transit hub for Nigerian females bound for Europe 
(please see section I under "INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION 
OF TRAFFICKERS" for more information on this case.) 
 
 
¶I.  The National Police Force, Customs, Immigration, and 
other relevant authorities lack financial resources and a 
sustained political commitment from the Federal Government 
to combat trafficking in persons effectively.  Few officers 
have been trained adequately to identify and monitor 
traffickers.  A handful of notable crusaders in the police 
force, mostly females, are personally committed to the issue 
and effect the largest results. They regularly use their own 
funds or resources to feed and care for deportees, or to pay 
for travel to neighboring states for investigations.  Former 
Deputy Inspector General (DIG) of Police Abimbola Ojomo and 
Head of the Lagos-based task force against TIP, Mrs. D.A. 
Gimba, demonstrate a personal commitment to fight 
traffickers and aid victims.  Immigration comptrollers are 
visiting state officials, local government authorities, and 
traditional rulers to raise awareness of the issue. 
 
 
Corruption, endemic in Nigerian society after decades of 
misrule and mismanagement by military rulers, remains one of 
the GON's most pressing problems.  The GON could summon 
adequate resources to address the TIP problem, but to date 
has chosen to allocate resources to other pressing, and 
equally distressing, problems facing the country.  Reports 
from air carriers suggest that most sex workers travel with 
authentic documents.  False Nigerian documents can be 
purchased cheaply and easily.  Italian documents, 
particularly the residency permit, are extremely vulnerable 
to fraud.  The GON has not demonstrated the ability nor the 
will to curb fraud in the issuance of travel documents. 
Therefore, the onus has fallen on Italian authorities to 
control entry.  In 2002, the Italian and Nigerian 
governments signed a repatriation agreement, but this does 
not seem to address the problem of immigration fraud. 
Police attempts to stem TIP were inadequate, and frequently 
the victims were subjected to lengthy detention and public 
humiliation upon repatriation. 
 
 
¶3.  PREVENTION: 
 
 
¶A.  The GON acknowledges that trafficking is a problem and 
is aware of the negative image that trafficking generates. 
However, many GON officials put the responsibility for 
addressing the international TIP problem on destination 
countries, such as Italy.  Some officials and even NGOs 
blame the problem on demand for Nigerian prostitutes in 
Europe.  The trafficking of women and children from northern 
Nigeria to Saudi Arabia is a growing problem, but officials 
of these predominately Muslim states are reluctant to admit 
the existence of a sex or labor trade to Muslim countries. 
Nigerian Government officials also do not openly admit the 
internal trafficking of children within Nigeria for forced 
labor purposes. 
 
 
¶B.  In the past year, a number of Nigerian government 
agencies became more involved in anti-trafficking efforts, 
particularly at the state level.  Several governors and 
their spouses have developed a personal interest in the 
issue and begun holding state ministerial-level meetings, 
including such state and local agencies as Women's Affairs, 
Social Development, Police, Justice, Children's Affairs, 
Juvenile Courts, and the Attorney General.  Among the most 
active new examples are Governor and Mrs. Achike Udenwa in 
Imo, Governor and Mrs. Peter Odili in Rivers, Governor and 
Mrs. Victor Attah in Akwa Ibom, and Governor Orji Kalu in 
Abia.  At the federal level, the main anti-TIP body is the 
inter-ministerial committee to address TIP. 
 
 
GON anti-trafficking efforts still focus largely on law 
enforcement through Customs, Immigration, and the Nigerian 
Police Force, including the Anti-TIP Task Force in Lagos. 
In the past, police attempted to deter the trafficking of 
women by imposing jail sentences and publicly humiliating 
the victims.  In 1999, the federal Criminal Investigation 
Department (CID) paraded a group of 47 females and 17 male 
victims before the press in Lagos.  Later that year, 62 
undocumented women were deported from Italy to Nigeria and 
met by police, local media, their parents and village 
chiefs.  They were promptly arrested.  Such deportations 
from Italy are common now, and the deportees are not 
arrested but rather released after a cursory screening. 
Both approaches to handling the deportees appear ineffective 
as greed continues to motivate parents, relatives, and 
traffickers in the sex industry.  The absence of punishment 
for traffickers also encourages them to continue their 
crimes.  One of the highest-risk groups for trafficking is 
returned victims.  Former Deputy Inspector General Ojomo, 
who has participated in several international trafficking 
conferences, searches for sponsors for rehabilitation 
programs for returned prostitutes to prevent their being re- 
trafficked. 
 
 
¶C.  National public awareness campaigns undertaken by NGOs, 
prominent politicians, state governments, presidential 
statements, and the press are gaining widespread attention. 
Public awareness of TIP increased with Nigerian 
participation in trafficking for Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation (CSE) in Europe and awareness of child 
trafficking for forced labor is growing substantially.  As 
discussed above, new legislation promises to raise the TIP 
profile further.  WOTCLEF raises national awareness of the 
trafficking problem through Titi Abubakar's high profile 
involvement in the issue.  In 2001 WOTCLEF sponsored the 
first Nigerian-hosted Pan-African conference on Human 
Trafficking in Abuja. 
 
 
Despite the capital-intensive nature of reaching the village 
level (transportation requires rugged vehicles and hours of 
slow plodding through dilapidated, ill-defined roads at 
times overrun by vegetation), state level actors and making 
significant headway in public awareness campaigns.  In 2002, 
Imo State forged an innovation and comprehensive anti- 
trafficking campaign through its Ministry of Women's Affairs 
and Social Development.  This campaign includes radio 
jingles in pidgin English and local tongues (warning parents 
to "beware of people who come with shiny gifts"), handbills, 
billboards, newsletters, public service announcements, 
posters, a 5-episode television dramatization series, a 
documentary, and on-site, intensive, public briefings by the 
ministry in all Imo local governments. The Imo House of 
Assembly introduced a bill mandating that employers provide 
for education of their household staff. 
 
 
Public awareness campaigns continue to blanket Edo and other 
eastern states where most of the commercial sex workers 
originate.  Despite campaign efforts, the lucrative returns 
from the international prostitution trade and prevailing 
economic conditions lower the stigma attached to 
prostitution.  Idia Renaissance works to raise awareness of 
the dangers of trafficking with parents, leaders, 
traditional rulers, village heads, and civic groups.  The 
governor established an Underprivileged Children's 
Scholarship Fund for 179 students.  Youths affiliated with 
the Chari-love NGO in Edo wrote, produced, and perform a 
play to educate communities about the deadly allure and 
hazards associated with TIP.  Other on-going campaigns 
include issue-raising by Josephine Anenih, wife of the 
former federal Minister of Works and Housing, as President 
of the Federation of Women lawyers (FIDA) in Edo State, 
whose lobbying efforts brought about the 2000 law increasing 
Edo's penalties for traffickers.  Despite the humiliation to 
victims, Governor Lucky Igbinedion has published the names 
of returned prostitutes and their families in the national 
dailies to discourage families from putting their daughters 
into prostitution.  This controversial tactic began to 
stigmatize the prostitution industry in Edo society, which 
had largely grown to accept it as an admirable employment 
for the state's young ladies. 
 
 
In October 2002 in Anambra, Geneveve Ekwochi, the 
commissioner for women affairs told the press that some 
orphanages were selling babies entrusted to their care. 
Following an allegation made against one such home, she 
ordered it closed transferred the home's 22 babies to a 
government-owned home.  Ekwochi said the home's caretaker 
had been arrested and charged with child trafficking.  She 
said their investigation "had so far found that the babies 
were sold abroad, where their organs such as kidney and 
heart were being transplanted into patients." 
 
 
Onari Duke, wife of the governor of Cross River, is 
particularly concerned about the sale of children by their 
families in the northern part of the state during the period 
just after the holidays, when families may be financially 
strapped.  Despite the efforts in these particular states, 
Bisi Olateru-Olagberi of Women's Consortium of Nigeria 
(WOCON) says funding for shelters that provide housing, 
education, job training, and protection from family members 
for the repatriated women is an unmet and immediate short- 
term need.  Olateru-Olagberi's organization's preliminary 
research on the problem includes a survey of repatriated 
women.  She also conducts public awareness campaigns and 
national workshops. In the North, Girl-Child Education 
Programs are an important preventive measure. 
 
 
¶D.  The federal government offers little to women and 
children as alternatives to trafficking.  The GON is 
actively engaged in an ILO/IPEC program to end Nigeria's 
Worst Forms of Child Labor.  The federal Ministry of Women's 
Affairs has few accomplishments to advance the economic or 
social status of Nigerian women.  A handful of national 
leaders are committed to advancing women politically, and 
women have made limited in-roads in this respect during the 
season leading up to the Spring 2003 elections.  Women face 
formidable social and legal barriers to equal opportunity 
with men, including Constitutional discrepancies in women's 
rights compared to those of men.  Although primary education 
is compulsory, this requirement is not rigorously enforced. 
Many primary and secondary school aged children work when 
they should be in the classroom.  Child labor experts 
believe that the GON's commitment to improving educational 
access is genuine, but tangible results of this commitment 
have yet to materialize (ref B). 
 
 
State governments are increasingly taking initiative in 
providing options.  Many recognize that free primary 
education is the best means of relieving the pressure 
poverty places on families most vulnerable to trafficking. 
In Imo state, the government stopped collecting school 
levies and provided school uniforms.  Primary school fees 
are less than a dollar per month, which the government 
believes is an affordable cost to most families.  Most of 
the women returned to Nigeria are ethnic Bini and hail from 
Edo State, the former kingdom of Benin.  Eki Igbinedion, 
wife of the Edo state governor, founded the NGO "Idia 
Renaissance" to fight prostitution and trafficking.  Idia 
also rehabilitates repatriated prostitutes.  At the Idia 
Skills Acquisition Center in Edo, 200 young women enroll in 
four to six month programs teaching in catering, computers, 
secretarial, hairdressing and sewing.  This year, they are 
 
SIPDIS 
venturing into a microcredit cooperative program to foster 
the young girls' creation of cottage industries to sustain 
themselves.  Idia's educational programs address high drop- 
out rates among girls aged 15 to 20. The Edo government's 
subcommittee on women's political affairs creates awareness 
of the issue, instills responsibility in parents toward 
their children, and educates children to the dangers of the 
trade.  Press reports indicate that traffickers have 
threatened the Igbinedions for their high-profile exposure 
of those involved in the trade. 
 
 
In 2002 the Rivers State government created seven skills 
acquisition centers in local governments.  They intend to 
place one in each of the 23 local governments.  Skills 
taught in the centers included sewing, hairdressing, 
cosmetics, carpentry, soap- making, computers, catering, and 
decorating.  The Rivers government recognizes a myriad of 
social factors compounds TIP, and is working on ways to 
address them all.  Trafficking in Persons is in large 
measure a symptom of the widespread social, economic and 
political problems that confront Nigeria.  These myriad 
problems will need to be addressed in tandem with the 
creation of greater public awareness of the dangers of TIP 
if TIP itself is to be reduced and eventually eliminated. 
 
 
In Akwa Ibom state, officials have made in-roads to defining 
the pattern of traffickers and hope to undermine their 
operations with increased surveillance.  In 2002, the police 
commissioner recognized that Akwa Ibom had a large and 
growing trafficking problem.  Law enforcement officials 
there estimate that Akwa Ibom is mainly a "transit center," 
with less than half the victims originating directly from 
the state.  The destinations include Cameroon, Equatorial 
Guinea, South Africa, and Gabon.  Parents of the victims 
within the state have received pay-offs.  The state's 
woman's commission began airing radio jingles to warn 
parents of the truth behind trafficker schemes.  Their core 
message is that parents must learn to be responsible for 
their children until they are adults, to "get away from the 
idea that sending them to the 'Big City' will lead to their 
better future."  As the wife of Governor Attah says, "There 
must be a partnership.  The government must say to its 
people, we will educate your child and provide opportunity 
for skills development.  The parent must agree to be 
responsible for the child's guardianship until they are 
ready to provide for themselves."  They are engaging in a 
sustained sensitization program, but warn that the 
underlying cause of poverty is less easily addressed. 
 
 
In Abia state, NGOs worked with the Ministry of Women's 
Affairs to raise public awareness of the trafficking 
problem.  WOTCLEF held a public forum at Abia State 
University to sensitize mothers to the dangers with allowing 
their children to be sold off.  The women's commissioner 
argued that "The problems lie with the parents.  Mothers 
pretend not to see."  Other messages included the warning 
that pursuit of "fast money" and a glorified lifestyle would 
not pay off in the long run. In villages, anti-TIP meetings 
and workshops addressed grassroots.  Churches held meetings 
to raise the issue with parishioners.  There had been a few 
television discussions on the rights of the child and child 
abuse.  UNICEF programs were sensitizing the local 
population about birth control.  The local governments had 
set up child rights committees.  Since 2000, Abia was 
enforcing a "no hawking during school hours" rule to curb 
the time spent out of the classroom by children. 
 
 
Supplementing individual state efforts, NGOs have made 
significant contributions to preventing TIP.  In Edo State, 
St. Rita's Comprehensive High School provides three-year 
vocational training in various programs, including: 
cosmetology, computers, catering, secretarial and 
accountancy, weaving, fashion and designing for more than 
100 students between the ages of 17 and 25.  With additional 
funding, they could double their number of students. 
 
 
¶E.  The GON is able to support prevention programs, but only 
to a limited extent.  To date, there is no anti-TIP budget 
item.  The GON has many pressing needs before it and has not 
yet focused on a comprehensive anti-trafficking program.  An 
overall improvement in Nigeria's badly deteriorated economy 
and education system is needed to address the root causes of 
Nigeria's TIP problem.  Moreover, a complete overhaul of the 
system of endemic corruption would free resources for 
productive social programs.  Elected officials regularly 
divert funds specifically allocated to official social 
projects to other use. 
 
 
¶F.  The relationship between the federal executive and 
legislative institutions and NGOs varies depending upon the 
NGO's political affiliations.  NGOs' repeated efforts to 
introduce anti-TIP legislation in the National Assembly were 
thwarted until the Vice-President's wife's NGO, WOTCLEF, 
successfully submitted the draft anti-TIP law to the 
Assembly in 2001, which finally passed last month (see 
above).  NGOs in all areas of civic society want federal 
funding of their programs.  The involvement of wives of 
government officials has made it increasingly difficult to 
distinguish between genuine NGOs and other politically- 
oriented organizations established under the banner of anti- 
TIP work.  Established NGOs with good grassroots support 
feel threatened by and are often out-financed by NGOs 
created by high-profile political figures.  Despite heavy 
competition for scarce resources, most anti-TIP NGOs are 
familiar with and complimentary of each other's work.  Some 
work together or regularly meet to discuss issues of common 
interest.  NGOs frequently applaud the GON's permissive 
attitude toward freedom of speech and association since 
1999, a dividend of democracy that is appreciated 
universally. 
 
 
¶G.  No, the GON does not adequately monitor its borders or 
immigration and emigration patterns for evidence of 
trafficking.  Not all law enforcement agencies respond 
appropriately to such evidence.  For example, Embassy 
officers repeatedly have observed small sum payments to 
customs and immigration officers (the equivalent of 20 cents 
to ten dollars) for quick passage without paperwork.  Four 
countries border Nigeria, and illicit trafficking of persons 
and goods is easily conducted via unofficial border 
crossings.  Poorly trained and corrupt immigration officials 
do not look for evidence of trafficking, nor do they usually 
respond adequately when evidence is presented.  As noted 
above, stricter document controls and scrutiny at Murtala 
Mohammed International Airport in Lagos have resulted in a 
shift of trafficking patterns to take advantage of the 
country's porous overland borders and coastal maritime 
routes. 
 
 
¶H.  In 2002 the President established an inter-ministerial 
committee to coordinate all federal anti-TIP policies and 
programs.  The committee is chaired by the Minister of State 
for Justice and has subcommittees on law enforcement; 
prevention efforts, legal reform; and planning of an 
international anti-TIP summit. In 2002 President Obasanjo 
established the position of Special Assistant to the 
President on Human Trafficking and Child Labor.  The 
government has a police anti-TIP task force and an 
independent (answering only to the President) anti- 
corruption commission.  However, throughout the year, the 
looming 2003 elections demanded increasing attention by 
senior elected officials. 
 
 
¶I.  The GON continues to participate in regional and 
international conferences and forums addressing TIP, 
including the Regional Meeting on the Implementation of the 
ECOWAS Plan of Action Against Trafficking in Persons in Lome 
in December 2002.  This meeting focused on national actions, 
areas for multilateral cooperation, proposed solutions and a 
Plan of Action for areas of intervention which suffer from 
gaps or duplicate efforts.  The GON postponed its planned 
hosting of an international TIP summit in Abuja August 2002 
to formulate better regional and international strategies to 
prevent, monitor and combat trafficking. No new date has 
been announced. 
 
 
¶J.  The GON does not yet have a national plan of action to 
address TIP.  The National Labor Advisory Council (NLAC) is 
responsible for receiving and investigating child labor 
complaints and for enforcing regulations.  NLAC, IPEC, and 
UNICEF are coordinating efforts to develop enforcement 
strategies, focusing on awareness and official training 
activities.  The Ministry of Employment, Labor and 
Productivity established a special office for child labor. 
Additional information on child labor issues is in Ref B. 
The inter-ministerial TIP Committee is working toward a 
national plan with the assistance of the USDOL-funded ILO- 
IPEC program.  The Ministries of Women and Child 
Development, Health, Education, Justice and Foreign Affairs 
are key participants in this process, which will include the 
voices of NGOs, according to the responsible Presidential 
Advisor. 
 
 
¶K.  In 2002 President Obasanjo named Michael Mku to the new 
position of Special Assistant to the President on Human 
Trafficking and Child Labor.  Mku has since left the 
position and no replacement has been named. 
 
 
¶4. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS: 
¶A.  As discussed above, until President Obasanjo signs the 
bill which passed the National Assembly on February 18, 
2003, no federal law specifically prohibits TIP.  With the 
legislation's passage, there is renewed hope that anti-TIP 
efforts will be successful as Nigeria's criminal code 
undergoes change in this new democracy.  The criminal code 
applying to southern Nigerian states addresses some 
trafficking aspects, especially regarding children, in 
chapter 21.  Sections 276-279 of the Northern Penal code, 
which applies to the 17 northern states, forbid trafficking 
of females for prostitution or any immoral or illegal 
purpose.  It should be noted that each of Nigeria's 36 
states began updating state laws in 1999.  The criminal code 
and the penal code may no longer be universally applicable 
as new laws or court systems (e.g. Shari'a statutes) have 
supplanted or supplemented older laws.  For example, Edo's 
law specifically targets traffickers of women and children, 
adding provisions beyond those found in the criminal code. 
There are laws against kidnapping, rape, and slavery of 
which prosecutors can avail themselves to arrest traffickers 
in many cases. 
 
 
¶B.  There is no federal penalty for trafficking in persons, 
given the lack of a federal trafficking law.  Under the 
criminal code, penalties for trafficking of children include 
fines and imprisonment from two to seven years.  Under the 
penal code, penalties for encouragement of prostitution for 
women or children range up to ten years. 
 
 
¶C.  The penal code protects children from sexual abuse 
through age 14 and defines all abuse under this age as 
rape.  The criminal code prohibits the sexual assault or 
indecent assault of boys under the age of 14 (Criminal code 
Cap. 42, Chapter XXI, S. 216) and girls under the age of 13 
(Criminal Code Cap. 42, Ch. XXI, S. 218).  Sexual assault of 
girls between the ages of 13 to 15 is known as defilement 
and is categorized as a misdemeanor offense (Criminal code 
Cap. 42, Ch. XXI, S. 221).  For conviction of unlawful 
carnal knowledge or defilement of girls, prosecution must 
take place within two months of the commission of the 
offense, and be corroborated by the testimony of an 
additional witness.  (Comment:  few convictions for sexual 
assault or defilement of girls are won -- or even brought 
before a court -- under these statutes.  The criminal court 
system can take months if not years to hear a case.  It is 
extremely difficult for prosecutors to find a witness to 
corroborate the victim's testimony, especially since 
discussion of sexual issues is taboo in most areas.  End 
Comment.)  Anyone causing or encouraging female prostitution 
before age 16 is liable for imprisonment up to two years 
(criminal code Cap. 42, Ch. XXI, S. 222A).  Adults and Rape: 
under the criminal code, rape is defined as "unlawful carnal 
knowledge of a woman or girl, without her consent, if the 
consent is obtained by force or by other means of threat or 
intimidation of any kind, or any fear of harm, or by means 
of false and fraudulent representation as to the nature of 
the act."  The penalty is life imprisonment.  A judge may 
also declare an additional penalty of "whipping" for a 
convicted rapist.  Under Section 282 of the Penal Code, the 
threat of death or injury, or the use of deceit, must be 
used for unlawful carnal knowledge to be considered rape. 
The Penal Code provides for a court to determine any length 
of imprisonment, including life, for rape.  Compared to the 
Edo State law against trafficking, and the provisions in 
Chapter 21 of the Criminal Code, and provisions in the Penal 
Code, Nigerian lawmakers view rape as a much more serious 
offense.  Unfortunately, few offenders are brought to book 
despite these laws. 
 
 
¶D.  As there is no federal law against trafficking, no cases 
have been tried under an anti-TIP law.  Criminal penalties 
and civil fines have not been applied successfully and do 
not deter violations of child labor laws. The GON attempted 
to prosecute one prominent case in 2002 against a well-known 
Lagos businesswoman, Bisi Dan Musa, wife of a former 
presidential candidate.  She was arrested and charged with 
19 counts of child stealing and slave dealing, as no anti- 
TIP law had yet been enacted.  Authorities reportedly found 
16 children between the ages of 1 and 4 in her custody 
without evidence of authorization from the parents.  The 
trial was discontinued after most of the parents could not 
be found or were unwilling to testify, and she was released 
on bail.  As discussed above, the GON in November 2002 was 
searching for a former customs officer and two others 
suspected of trafficking children in Abuja.  The 
investigation is still underway.  At the end of 2002, 30 
trafficking cases were pending in Edo, which has an anti- 
trafficking law and an anti-TIP police unit, including one 
case against a senior traditional ruler who was stripped of 
his title. Many states arrested known traffickers but were 
forced to release them when victims and their families 
refused to testify.  See also section F below. 
 
 
¶E.  Some traffickers enjoy strong ties to traditional 
rulers, particularly in Edo and southeastern states.   The 
collusion of victims' family members impedes law enforcement 
efforts.  As noted previously, anecdotal evidence suggests 
that Edo state-based crime groups control the traffic in 
women and girls from that state to Italy and engage in other 
such criminal activities as drug-trafficking and money- 
laundering.  Moreover, there is increasing evidence that 
former victims of trafficking are involved in the 
recruitment of young girls for commercial sex work in 
Europe.  Some law enforcement and government officials in 
Edo reportedly have been involved in the trade.  Travel 
agencies and employment firms based in the South-East and 
South-South frequently advertise bogus offers of legitimate 
employment in Europe and the U.S.; these firms are suspected 
trafficking fronts. 
 
 
¶F.  Interpol and members of the anti-Trafficking Task Force 
have minimal resources for investigations and are 
preoccupied with repatriating victims to their states of 
origin.  The task force swings into action when it receives 
notice of imminent deportation of Nigerian TIP victims from 
Europe or a trafficker is intercepted at the border.  They 
begin investigations by interviewing victims, who generally 
do not cooperate in providing criminal evidence against 
traffickers because of their fear of retribution or 
preternatural curses.  Next, members of the task force will 
videotape the victims and travel to their homes for 
identification purposes and contact their families.  The 
deportees are tested for HIV/AIDS.  Those who test positive 
are turned over to the state of origin's commission for 
health.  Electronic surveillance and undercover operations 
are techniques used in the investigation of other criminal 
activities in Nigeria.  Edo State is developing a witness 
protection program and exploring options for camera-based 
testimony.  However, given inadequate resources, such 
techniques are not currently employed in Nigeria's anti-TIP 
law enforcement response.  Since traffickers have yet to be 
convicted, the issue of mitigated punishment or immunity 
from prosecution is generally moot. 
 
 
The government regularly arrests suspected traffickers, 
which has received increased press coverage in the past 
year.  In March 2002, immigration officials arrested 3 
traffickers and freed 12 victims in the north.  The 
traffickers and the victims were paraded before the press by 
the Minister of Internal Affairs, Chief Sunday Afolabi, who 
used the occasion to condemn trafficking as "modern-day 
slavery" and called for tighter scrutiny of travel documents 
at West African borders.  In April 2002, the State Security 
Service intercepted ten teenage girls being trafficked out 
of Nigeria and arrested the trafficker. 
 
 
In September 2002, a victim escaped to a nearby police 
station in Oyo State to report that she and three other 
teenagers had been trafficked to Ibadan for CSE from Edo 
State.  The police arrested the two traffickers, but the 
outcome of the case is not known.  In January 2003, police 
in Ebonyi State arrested seven businessmen from Cross River 
State who "were found in possession of ten under-aged boys" 
while traveling to Akure, Ondo State.  Reports said the 
police discovered "different types of charms with the 
suspects, and it was believed that the charms were used in 
making the children to be unconscious."  Children told the 
press that they "did not know their destination, but were 
only promised that they would be helped to make some money. 
The children said they had to start looking for means of 
earning some income because their parents could no longer 
pay their school fees."  Demonstrating the limited social 
understanding of the conventional trafficking definitions, 
the suspects denied involvement in child trafficking, 
"saying that they were only trying to get their junior ones 
to Akure to get employment."  The police commissioner 
"paraded the victims" before journalists, who published the 
children's names.  The victims and traffickers were held by 
police while the case was pending.  Also in January 2003, 
immigration officials in Ogun State arrested four suspected 
traffickers and twenty child victims.  Some were allegedly 
in transit for housekeeping work in Lagos, others for 
prostitution.  The cases were pending at the time of this 
report. 
 
 
¶G.  Police understanding of the trafficking problem remains 
varied.  In meeting with USG officials on TIP, police 
commissioners in some states demonstrated their lack of 
understanding of standard TIP definitions.  When given time 
and audience, post has successfully explained the 
distinctions between trafficker and victim, trafficking and 
smuggling, and so on.  Comprehensive training at all levels 
of the law enforcement community would help.  The Nigerian 
Police Force (NPF) soon will receive a specialized anti- 
trafficking training program for members of its anti-TIP 
Task Force as well as members of the general police force 
posted to areas of significant trafficking activity.  This 
project, which the UGG funds and the International Office of 
Migration implements, will seek to add an anti-TIP training 
module to the basic training curriculum for new police 
recruits. 
 
 
In August 2002, the only female police commissioner, Nana 
Aisha Abdulkadri, announced at a press conference in Port 
Harcourt, Rivers State the creation of an all-female special 
mobile police squad to be deployed "mainly for the fight 
against human trafficking, particularly female trafficking." 
Commissioner Abdulkadri said the squad "will be given 
special training on martial arts" and "used to investigate 
cases of human trafficking, especially women, and as under- 
covers on drug barons as well as to investigate other cases 
that concern women and crime." 
 
 
¶H.  On January 14, 2003, the instruments of ratification of 
the U.S.-Nigerian Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) were 
formally exchanged and the Treaty was entered into force. 
Although the MLAT does not deal specifically with TIP, under 
this treaty, the GON will establish an interagency anti- 
fraud unit and taskforce that will be responsible for 
combating the use of fraudulent documents at MMIA in an 
attempt to gain entry to the U.S.  With this process, 
fraudulent documents should be detected and traffickers 
exposed.  The GON cooperates with other governments on TIP 
investigations and prosecutions.  As in previous reports, 
post cannot provide a specific number of cases.  The most 
significant case remained the 2001-2002 arrest of 15 
Nigerian traffickers in Conakry and the Guinean government's 
subsequent extradition of these 15 to Nigeria (see paragraph 
I below). 
 
 
¶I.  The 1931 U.S.-UK Extradition Treaty was made applicable 
to Nigeria in 1935 and is the legal basis for pending U.S. 
extradition requests.  The GON's extradition agreements with 
numerous countries but usually have a "dual criminality" 
requirement: a person is not subject to extradition to stand 
trial for an alleged offense committed in/against a foreign 
country unless that same offense is a crime under Nigerian 
federal law.  Since trafficking is not yet a federal crime, 
traffickers cannot be extradited for that particular 
offense, though they could be extradited for related 
offenses such as kidnapping, slavery, and abuse of a minor. 
The 15 Nigerian traffickers arrested in Conakry were 
extradited to Nigeria, but the 33 women and girl victims 
failed to testify without protection.  The GON's early 2002 
prosecution of the 15 traffickers--including a former police 
commissioner--in this high-profile international case has 
stalled.  It appears unlikely to continue despite the GON's 
commitment to make this an example of strong anti-TIP 
enforcement.  The victims were returned to Edo, and some 
were re-trafficked.  Since then, Edo has increased 
prevention efforts by developing skills acquisition centers 
throughout the state for returning victims and other women 
and girls. 
 
 
As discussed above, there is evidence of government 
tolerance of trafficking on a local and national 
institutional level.  There are also cases against 
government officials accused of trafficking.  Deputy 
Inspector General (DIG) of Police Ojomo, forcibly retired on 
March 6, 2002, claimed to have been investigating 
allegations of the collusion of Customs officials in the 
illegal trade.  Returnees have made allegations that 
Nigerian Immigration officials accepted bribes to look the 
other way when traffickers take victims out of the country. 
There are credible allegations that some traditional rulers 
in Edo State have assisted traffickers and support the 
recruitment of Bini women into the international sex trade. 
Consequently, efforts to engage local government authorities 
and traditional rulers in an awareness campaign frequently 
run aground because of leadership acquiescence in or support 
of human smuggling. 
 
 
¶K.  See answer in section H of paragraph 2. 
 
 
¶L.  President Obasanjo signed the instruments of 
ratification for ILO Convention 182 concerning the 
prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of the 
worst forms of child labor in 2002, as well as ILO 
Convention 138 concerning Minimum Age for Employment and 
Convention 111 on Equality of Occupation.  On January 28, 
2003, the House of Representatives ratified the Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
especially women and children, which supplements the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. On the 
same day, the House rescinded its previous decision (on 
October 30, 2002) which rejected the Child Rights Bill. 
Public hearings on the bill will review and reconsider the 
bill, whose sections setting the minimum age for marriage at 
18 are considered "offensive" to some Nigerian customs. 
Despite the delay in passing this domestic law on child 
rights, Nigeria did ratify the UN Convention on the Rights 
of the Child in the early 1990s.  The GON signed the 
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the 
Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography 
on September 8, 2000 but has not yet ratified it.  In 2000, 
the GON became the first African country to sign the 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, especially Women and Children (supplementing the UN 
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime), which it 
ratified in 2001. 
 
 
¶5.  PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS: 
 
 
¶A.  Clear policies have not yet been established to deal 
with persons trafficked to Nigeria. All regular laws apply. 
For trafficked victims returned to Nigeria, social services 
for resettlement are provided by a small number of 
financially-strapped NGOs, not the government.  Some victims 
are forcibly returned against their will when foreign police 
sweep and round up prostitutes for deportation.  These 
victims usually lose any private property they had acquired 
abroad and arrive home in chains.  Other victims, escaping 
the tight watch of their traffickers, return voluntarily 
through such programs as that offered by IOM. 
The Italian government has provided USD 800,000 to the IOM 
for assistance to women and girls repatriated to Nigeria and 
to provide medical aid for returnees with HIV/AIDS.  The 
Italian government provided another USD one million for 
preventative medical programs discouraging the spread of 
HIV/AIDS in the country. Various actors within the GON have 
made sporadic attempts over the past four years to "parade" 
returned victims before the media to discourage cooperation 
with traffickers.  Media reports have carried estimates of 
the number of those infected by HIV/AIDS in these reports. 
While it may serve as a deterrent to some potential victims, 
this campaign does not provide any assistance to those 
already victimized by the illicit trade. 
 
 
In Edo State, IOM has opened a brand-new shelter that can 
comfortably house several dozen repatriated trafficking 
victims.  IOM airs jingles, television spots, and displays 
posters and billboards across Edo as a preventive campaign. 
IOM also runs a hotline to answer questions the public has 
about trafficking (although this has had mixed results--some 
callers want information about how to join in CSE 
trafficking).  IOM meets with village heads and arranges 
public viewing of an educational video in the center 
squares. 
 
 
In December 2002, the Swedish International Development 
Cooperation Agency (SIDA) allocated USD 900,000 over three 
years to support a UNICEF anti-TIP project, its "Model Youth 
Resource Learning Centre in the South-south zone of 
Nigeria."  The project will "reduce the underlying causes of 
child trafficking, youth violence and HIV/AIDS prevalence 
among adolescents in Edo and Delta states in collaboration 
with the Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Youth 
Development, state and local governments as well as civil 
society actors." 
 
 
¶B.  The GON has planned to provide funding to NGOs, such as 
the National Council for Women Societies, WOTCLEF, the Child 
Welfare League of Nigeria (CWLN), and IDIA Renaissance 
through the Inter-ministerial Committee Against Trafficking 
in Persons to assist returning victims.  To date, such funds 
have not been allocated or received by the NGOs. 
 
 
¶C.  In September 2002, Foreign Minister Sule Lamido publicly 
appealed to host countries of Nigerians abroad that "the 
dignity of Nigerians must be respected, migrant workers of 
Nigerian origin protected and those trafficked recognized as 
victims who must be assisted rather than be dehumanized." 
Victims who are returned from other countries, such as 
Italy, are currently subjected to confinement, sometimes in 
cramped facilities along with criminals for varying periods 
of time.  Victims repatriated to Nigeria are also subjected 
to mandatory testing for HIV/AIDS and other sexually 
transmitted diseases before being released from police 
custody. These repatriated trafficking victims are seldom 
prosecuted for violations of other laws such as immigration 
or prostitution offenses. 
 
 
¶D.  The Police Anti-TIP Task Force encourages repatriated 
victims to provide testimony for the prosecution of Nigeria- 
based traffickers, but it rarely receives adequate evidence 
as many women and girls have been threatened by traffickers, 
often through juju, if they cooperate with law enforcement. 
There is no witness protection program in Nigeria, though 
witnesses could seek legal action against traffickers 
through civil suits (no such suits are known to date). 
Given the lack of a federal trafficking law and the paucity 
of related criminal investigations, it is not known if 
victims who cooperate in an criminal investigation as a 
material witness are permitted to obtain other employment or 
leave the country. 
 
 
¶E.  No victim or witness protection is currently available, 
though, as mentioned above, the federal government is 
planning to establish long-term care and vocational training 
facilities for returned victims.  Also, witness protection 
measures may be included in the TIP legislation now being 
considered by the President Obasanjo for signature into law. 
Edo State is working to develop a witness protection program 
of its own. 
 
 
¶F.  Italy is by far the destination of choice for Nigerian 
women trafficked abroad.  The GON has stationed a consular 
officer at its embassy in Rome to assist Nigerian 
trafficking victims arrested or rescued by Italian police 
and to facilitate their repatriation to Nigeria.  The 
Nigerian Embassy in Rome works closely with Italian police, 
immigration and Carbineri and coordinates shelter care for 
Nigerian trafficking victims with Catholic NGOs such as 
Caritas.  Diplomatic personnel have been trained in other 
key posts, such as Gabon, Benin, and Togo, to assist, refer, 
and shelter victims. 
 
 
The Nigerian Ambassador to Gabon was personally responsible 
for assisting two children in Libreville who recently 
approached the Embassy for asylum from their trafficker.  He 
contacted the state of origin of the children, which was 
Imo, and WOTCLEF brought the children back to Abuja for 
eventual return to their worried mother, a widow who thought 
her children were in the care of a generous distant 
relative.  The Nigerian Ambassador has set up a small center 
in Libreville to provide shelter to other victims.  Word has 
spread among the Nigerian victims in Gabon that the Embassy 
can help them.  In response to this information, Imo State 
sent an official delegation on a fact-finding mission to 
Libreville.  Upon return, they immediately began their new 
public awareness campaign strategy as discussed above. 
Training of other Nigerian consular officers and members of 
the NPF anti-TIP Task Force in Lagos, appears informal and 
minimal, though the IOM project mentioned previously plans 
to provide a formal training regime for the Police. 
 
 
¶G.  The GON's Anti-TIP Task Force provides limited short- 
term shelter for victims of trafficking returned to Nigeria. 
The GON recently donated land in Lagos for a victim transit 
shelter facility.  This is facilitating the IOM's voluntary 
repatriation program mentioned previously.  Victims who test 
positive for HIV/AIDS at the short-term shelter in Lagos are 
turned over to the health commissions of their state of 
origin for follow-on treatment and counseling. 
 
 
¶H.  Several NGOs are active on the anti-TIP front, 
including: Eki Igbinedion's IDIA Renaissance in Edo; Bisi 
Olateru-Olagberi's Women's Consortium of Nigeria (WOCON); 
Titi Abubakar's WOTCLEF; the International Human Rights Law 
Group; Women Advocates Research and Documentation Center 
(WARDC); Project Alert On Violence Against Women; BAOBAB for 
Women's Human Rights; Women, Law and Development Center; 
Nigerian Association of University Women; Central 
Educational Service; Women's Rights Watch Nigeria; National 
Commission of Women in Religions' Committee for the Support 
of the Dignity of Women; Federation of Women lawyers (FIDA). 
The National Coalition Against Trafficking in Persons 
(NACATIP) is an alliance of over a dozen NGOs to address 
common interests and share information at regular meetings 
or via email.  These groups, particularly IDIA Renaissance 
in Edo State, provide long-term comprehensive assistance to 
trafficking victims without receiving federal funding.  The 
stated commitment of President Obasanjo to the fight against 
TIP has not yet yielded funds for these local efforts to aid 
trafficking victims. 
 
 
¶6.  Post's contacts on this issue have been Lorelei 
Schweickert and Mark Taylor.  For the remainder of 2003, 
please contact Garace Reynard, +234-9-523-0916, 523-8001, 
523-0960, mobile +234-803-402-1471, email 
reynardga@state.gov. 
 
 
¶7.  Approximately 100 hours were spent by poloff (FS-5) in 
the preparation of this report. 
 
 
JETER 
JETER