This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 003200 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR H 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EU IT EUN
SUBJECT: CODEL HYDE DISCUSSIONS ON ITALIAN EU PRESIDENCY 
PRIORITIES WITH DPM FINI AND PARLIAMENT 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  Deputy Prime Minister Gianfranco Fini 
and Members of the Italian Parliament told CODEL Hyde that 
improving the transatlantic relationship was a priority for 
the Italian EU Presidency.  Fini said that the GOI recognizes 
and appreciates the sacrifices America has made to preserve 
freedom in Europe, and believes the EU and the US need close 
cooperation to prevent the spread of WMD. He said that the 
GOI wants to overcome differences on biotech issues during 
its Presidency, and said patent protection is crucial to 
fueling continued investment and wealth creation.  MPs 
stressed development of a European Procurement Agency as a 
longer-term goal to achieve a common market for military 
research, development and procurement, increasing efficiency 
and economies of scale.   Italy is aware of the need to 
confront rogue states that support terrorism and jeopardize 
international peace.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  (U)  From June 27 through July 2, a Congressional 
Delegation led by HIRC Chairman Henry Hyde visited Rome for 
Transatlantic Legislature Dialogue (TLD) meetings with 
Members of the European Parliament, and meetings with GOI 
officials to discuss GOI priorities for the Italian EU 
Presidency and bilateral economic and Political issues. 
(SEPTELS report TLD and economic bilateral meetings). 
Ambassador Sembler accompanied the CODEL to the meetings with 
Fini and the Italian Parliament.  CODEL members joining 
Chairman Hyde in the meetings with Fini and MPs were: Reps Jo 
Ann Davis, Henry Waxman, John Mica, Phil English, Ed 
Whitfield, Randy Forbes, Diane Watson, Katherine Harris, 
Thaddeus G. McCotter, and Candice Miller. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Deputy PM Fini opened the July 1 meeting with a 
warm welcome to Chairman Hyde and other delegates.  Noting 
Italy's assumption of the EU Presidency was to begin that 
day, Fini offered a sketch of the GOI's priorities. 
Improving the transatlantic relationship is a top priority, 
and Italy recognizes and appreciates the sacrifices America 
has made preserving freedom in Europe.  During its six-month 
Presidency the GOI hopes to guide the EU towards continued 
partnership with the U.S., not rivalry. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Fini made clear the EU had a responsibility, and 
the ability, to fight the GWOT alongside the U.S.  He agreed 
with the need to improve aviation security.  Fini believes 
the EU and the U.S. need close cooperation to prevent the 
spread of nuclear arms, and promised the GOI would focus on 
encouraging the EU to pursue additional inspections in Iran 
and provide aid to countries that cooperate in halting WMD 
proliferation.  In the war on drugs Italy stands shoulder to 
shoulder with the U.S., and is the second largest contributor 
to UN anti-drug efforts after the United States.  Fini did 
caution that foreign policy choices often have adverse 
consequences, pointing out the rapid rise in opium production 
that followed the Taliban's fall. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  On IPR, Fini underscored his support for the 
initiatives of Minister of Productive Activities Marzano, and 
said that patent protection is crucial to fueling continued 
investment and wealth creation.  He acknowledged that the 
fight against world hunger and poverty could be won with the 
assistance of biotech and GMOs.  The GOI wants to work 
towards overcoming differences on biotech issue during its 
Presidency, but the issue might be one where friends should 
agree to disagree.  Fini agreed hydrogen fuel cells were 
potentially useful if they raise the quality of life, but 
expressed concern that governments not ignore potential 
negative effects on auto workers. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Just prior to ending their meeting, Chairman Hyde 
thanked the GOI for its cooperation in the Middle East, 
noting with gratitude that PM Berlusconi did not meet with 
Arafat on a recent Middle East visit.  Fini said the GOI 
considers the success of the roadmap critical to the peace 
process and hopes the Quartet will continue to play a key 
role.  Palestinian PM Abu Mazen was invited to Rome in July, 
and Fini mentioned a possible peace conference in Sicily 
during the fall. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Immediately following the Fini meeting, the CODEL 
met Chamber Defense Committee Chair Luigi Ramponi, Foreign 
Affairs Vice Chair Dario Rivolta, and the Chamber's Alternate 
Representative to the European Convention (and ranking 
opposition member on the Foreign Affairs Committee) Valdo 
Spini. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Defense Chairman Ramponi (a member of the second 
party in the governing coalition, National Alliance, AN) 
emphasized development of Europe's self-defense capability, 
 
 
increased defense spending (within economic realities), using 
the entry of the ten new EU members to improve Europe's 
defense, and coordination of European defense against 
terrorism.  The latter, he noted, should rely not only on 
military means, but even more on integrating intelligence and 
law enforcement capabilities of all partners.  Ramponi also 
stressed development of a European Procurement Agency as a 
longer-term goal to achieve a common market for military 
research, development and procurement, increasing efficiency 
and economies of scale.  Ramponi urged the delegation to note 
Italy's extensive support for international peacekeeping 
operations (which they did in their responses and questions), 
despite budgetary limitations and domestic political 
pressures.  "We're with you in Iraq, in Afghanistan, in 
Kosovo, and elsewhere," Ramponi said, "despite our admittedly 
low spending on defense." 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Cong. Forbes sought Ramponi's evaluation of the 
implications of U.S. force transformation in Europe.  Ramponi 
acknowledged that different threats in Europe after the Cold 
War could justify a reduction and relocation in U.S. forces. 
"I would understand if you must reduce and would not think 
you are abandoning Europe politically," he said. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  Cong. Harris praised the reconstruction 
contributions of smaller, specialized Italian teams in 
Afghanistan and asked for further contributions of small 
teams to security outside Kabul.  She asked for clarification 
on the GOI request that the USG confirm that the 173rd 
Airborne had parachuted into a permissive environment in 
northern Iraq in the first week of Operation Iraqi Freedom; 
what did this imply for future cooperation?  Ramponi was 
pleased with the recognition of Italy's specialized 
contributions.  Outlining Italy's on-going contributions in 
Afghanistan, however, he implied further concurrent 
involvement was unlikely.  He suggested that involvement 
outside Kabul would require a new UN decision.  He explained 
some of the political pressure on the GOI during the Iraq 
war; it had requested confirmation of the 173rd's mission in 
order to defuse opposition allegations that the GOI had lied 
about use of Italian territory to launch military strikes 
against Iraq.  Ambassador Sembler clarified the 
constitutional restrictions under which Italy had operated. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  Rivolta ( foreign affairs spokesman for PM 
Berlusconi's Forza Italia (FI) party) highlighted Italy's 
pride at being a "special friend" of the U.S., adding that 
Italy cannot see a Europe that does not cooperate closely 
with the U.S.  Even in France and Germany, politicians know 
that the future of Europe is with the United States.  Europe 
can be a stronger and better partner to the U.S. if it is 
united, Rivolta continued.  Coordinating, rather than 
duplicating, will allow Europe to increase its defense 
spending as the U.S. has requested.  Italy is aware of the 
need to confront rogue states that support terrorism and 
jeopardize international peace.  Together, we can defeat 
their weapons, but, Rivolta added, we must also defeat the 
sympathy some feel toward those who engage in terrorism. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  Cong. Miller asked if possible American force 
restructuring in Europe would be perceived as retaliation, 
particularly if troops in Germany and France were reduced. 
Admitting that it was difficult for him to evaluate German or 
French reaction, Rivolta opined that if such a change 
occurred now, it could be perceived as a rupture.  Cong. 
Watson asked Rivolta to elaborate on Italy's relations with 
Syria and Iran.  Rivolta suggested Italy's continued dialogue 
with Syria might bring Damascus closer to U.S. (and Western) 
views.  Iran was a tougher case.  He had hoped for a quicker, 
easier transformation there. 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Cong. Tancredo asked if Italy shared U.S. 
concerns on human trafficking; how could we ensure more 
aggressive prosecution of perpetrators?  Rivolta replied that 
Italy is particularly exposed to the evils of trafficking 
with its huge coastline.  He explained Italy's overall 
concerns with immigration and trafficking, noting their 
importance in Italy's EU Presidency program.  He mentioned 
the discussion of whether to assist Libya with its ability to 
interdict illegal immigration flows by relaxing the embargo 
against Qaddafi. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Spini (member of opposition Democrats of the 
Left, DS) highlighted the critical importance of the 
Berlin-Plus agreement, noting it was yet to be resolved 
whether the EU or NATO would authorize use of the 
60,000-person Rapid Reaction Force.  Practically, he 
observed, it would have to be NATO, although not all European 
 
 
nations would agree.  Spini expressed optimism that 
differences over the Iraq war would lead to new understanding 
and cooperation. 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  Cong. Harris asked about new members' ability to 
enforce immigration policy.  Spini emphasized the importance 
of European integration in diminishing tensions from 
formerly-disputed borders between now-united nations.  The 
Ambassador asked Spini if the opposition supported PM 
Berlusconi's calls to expand the EU to Russia and Israel. 
No, Spini replied -- closer association with Russia, 
especially through NATO, was important, but Russia's economy 
is too different and too large to permit incorporation into 
the EU at this time.  Turning to Turkey's possible entry to 
the EU, Spini said there were advantages and disadvantages to 
the entry of the first Muslim country to a currently 
Christian Union.  For Israel, he urged involvement through a 
strong Mediterranean relationship now, with closer 
association after peace. 
 
¶16.  (U) The CODEL did not clear this telegram prior to 
departing Rome. 
Sembler 
NNNN 
 2003ROME03200 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED