This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 003365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OTRA ECON AMGT JO POWELL COLIN
SUBJECT: TRAVEL OF NEA ADVANCE TEAM FOR WORLD ECONOMIC 
FORUM - REQUEST FOR COUNTRY CLEARANCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 152361 
 
¶1. Embassy Amman grants country clearance to State/NEA 
personnel Gary Grappo, Amy Schedlbauer, Jessica Davies and 
Sonia Franceski to Amman, Jordan from o/a June 10 to o/a June 
25, 2003.  Purpose of the trip is to assist in coordinating 
and preparing for USG participation in the World Economic 
Forum Extraordinary Annual Meeting at the Dead Sea.  We 
welcome the opportunity to support and take action on 
planning and coordination with Grappo and the Jordanians and 
propose that Embassy Control Officer Tom Goldberger be 
assigned full time to collaborate and coordinate with Grappo 
and team.  Contact numbers for Mr. Goldberger are as follows: 
office: 011-962-6-592-0101, ext. 2556; fax: 
011-962-6-592-7653; home: 011-962-6-585-9657, mobile: 
011-962-79-560-8995.  The Embassy's after-hours telephone 
number is: 011-962-6-592-0120. 
 
¶2. The Embassy has begun holding internal meetings to prepare 
for WEF-related logistical requirements and to assign control 
officers.  We expect that Grappo and advance team members 
will join these countdown meetings beginning June 12.  We 
have also requested a meeting for Grappo with Planning 
Minister Awadallah (the Jordanian WEF Coordinator) on June 
¶12.  We understand that WEF officials will not begin work in 
Amman until June 15.  Control officer Goldberger will be 
available for all meetings between the NEA advance team and 
Jordanian and WEF officials. 
 
¶3. As requested in reftel, post has been in contact with WEF 
North America coordinator Corine Blesi in Geneva about hotel 
rooms, transportation, and credentialing requirements for the 
U.S. delegations.  We have also described to her the basic 
requirements of the two Congressional delegations that are 
expected to coincide with the delegation led by the 
Secretary.  With the NEA advance team's involvement and 
 
SIPDIS 
assistance, we will work with the WEF and the Jordanians on 
the coordinated needs of the official U.S. delegation and 
CODELs for transportation, hotel room, security, and other 
official USG requirements, such as arrangements for press 
events and bilateral meetings with Jordanian officials and 
other WEF participants. 
 
¶4. Valid visas are required for entry into Jordan.  Visas may 
be obtained at Queen Alia airport; however, Embassy suggests 
visitors obtain their visas in Washington prior to departure 
as there can be long lines for visa issuance at the airport. 
Money can be exchanged at the airport. 
 
¶5. Embassy has reserved accommodations at the Four Seasons 
Hotel, a 10-minute ride to the Embassy.  Phone: 
962-6-550-5555; Fax:  962-6-550-5556.  The hotel is within 
the per diem allowance.  The hotel accepts Visa, Master Card 
and Amex.  An Embassy driver and expeditor will meet Mr. 
Grappo and Ms. Franceski on June 11, and Ms. Schedlbauer on 
June 14, upon their arrival at the airport and accompany them 
to the hotel.  Post understands Ms. Davies will arrive POV 
from Damascus. 
 
¶6. Embassy Amman direct charges each office, agency and 
visiting delegation for all costs incurred in support of 
official travel.  These costs include American and foreign 
service national employees' overtime, holiday pay and premium 
pay as applicable, field travel by Embassy personnel, 
transportation costs, vehicle rental, telephone installation 
and service, cell phone rental and service for visiting party 
and embassy employees, long distance telephone calls, 
equipment rental, printing expenses, photocopying, 
maintenance service contracts on rental equipment, control 
room expenses, hospitality room expenses, and any other costs 
that can be directly attributed to the visit. 
 
Travelers are requested to provide fiscal data for all 
relevant costs. 
 
¶7.  Threat assessment: 
 
Although the anger associated with the war in Iraq has 
subsided to some degree at present, the lingering emotional 
impact could well continue to fuel the threat to Americans in 
Jordan. Post is currently investigating a shooting incident 
near an Amman hotel that has the appearance of a random act 
of violence against an American.  Recent incidents remind us 
of the ability of transnational terrorist groups, as well as 
less sophisticated local elements, to target Americans and 
Western interests in Jordan.  In March 2003, individuals 
acting under instructions from the former Iraqi government 
attempted to detonate an incendiary device in an Amman hotel. 
A group in southern Jordan was arrested in December 2002 for 
planning a possible attack against the embassy. The October 
28, 2002 assassination of a U.S. diplomat in Amman outside 
his residence was ultimately linked to Al-Qaida.  The 
perpetrators of the assassination were arrested by Jordanian 
authorities in December 2002.  Recent worldwide terrorist 
alerts have stated that extremist groups continue to plan 
terrorist attacks against U.S. interests.  In October 2002, 
Americans in Jordan were informed of a potential kidnapping 
plot by Al-Qaida.  In December 1999, a group affiliated with 
the Al-Qaida organization was arrested in Jordan.  This group 
was in the late planning stages of carrying out attacks 
against Western hotels and tourist sites. 
 
The State Department has urged Americans in Jordan to 
consider their personal security and well being, including 
consideration of departure from the country.  Americans who 
visit Jordan despite this warning should exercise maximum 
caution and take prudent measures to maintain their security. 
 
¶8.  Travel guidelines: 
 
American citizens and official visitors traveling in Jordan 
should exercise caution, be alert and stay informed of 
regional and local events that could quickly impact the 
security environment in the country.  Travelers should avoid 
large crowds and demonstrations and take measures to avoid 
areas where they are most likely to occur (city centers, 
universities, refugee camps), particularly during periods of 
increased tension.  It is also recommended to maintain a low 
profile and not establish predictable patterns of movement, 
even if only visiting for a short period. Taxis are the only 
form of public transportation that is recommended. 
 
Crime is generally not a serious problem for travelers in 
Jordan, although petty crime is somewhat common in the 
downtown Amman Hashimiyah Square area and near the Roman 
theater.  In the narrow streets of the old city and at some 
of the more popular tourist sites, crowded conditions invite 
pickpockets and other petty criminals.  Travelers are 
recommended to be more guarded in these areas and not present 
easy opportunities to criminals. 
 
As Jordan is an Islamic country, cultural sensitivities 
should be observed.  Female travelers should dress 
conservatively and not travel alone, particularly in areas 
not as accustomed to western visitors. Incidents of sexual 
harassment, assault and unwelcome advances of a sexual nature 
against western visitors and residents, although not 
frequent, have been reported.  These incidents, while 
troubling, have not been pervasive. 
 
¶9.  Other: 
 
For further information, see the State Department's Consular 
Information Sheet for Jordan at 
http://travel.state.gov/Jordan.html and the Public 
Announcement on travel in the Middle East and South Asia at 
http://travel.state.gov/mideast annouce.html. 
BERRY