This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 005165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON MIDEAST ROADMAP 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- Lead story in all papers today (08/14) focuses on 
the meetings U.S. Assistant Secretary Burns held with 
senior Jordanian officials and Palestinian Prime 
Minister Mahmoud Abbas in Amman yesterday.  According 
to the reports, Burns stressed Washington's commitment 
to the roadmap and President Bush's determination to 
establish a Palestinian State.  Another lead story 
covers the continuing debate in the Jordanian 
Parliament regarding the government's performance, in 
anticipation of a "vote of confidence" to be held 
today, August 14. 
 
 
 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "Washington's Responsibility First" 
 
Commenting on U.S. Envoy Burns' tour of the region, 
center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour 
(08/14) editorializes: "Observers are really confused 
about U.S. policy in the region.  At a time when 
Washington does not stop declaring its commitment to 
the peace process in the region and to the roadmap - 
an international initiative that enjoys unique 
unanimous approval - and at a time when the United 
States is stressing its commitment to regional 
stability and security, we see that it sides 
completely with the policies of an extremist     right- 
wing government in Israel working to undermine the 
wheels of peace, setting traps on the route of the 
Roadmap and heating up the northern front to bring the 
situation in the entire region to brinkmanship... As 
we follow the U.S. Envoy's tour of the region and 
closely observe the different legs of his current 
tour, we call on the United States to play its role 
and live up to its responsibilities as the leader of 
the new world order as a sponsor of the peace process 
to make every effort possible to remove all obstacles 
that prevent the negotiations from remaining on track. 
The core of those obstacles lies in the government of 
Tel Aviv and its policies, coalition, program, and 
practices." 
 
-- "So That We Are Not Held Hostages to Terrorism and 
the Arrogance of Power" 
 
Semi-official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai (08/14) 
editorializes: "Even though U.S. Envoy William Burns 
made sure to say in Amman that the United States is 
committed to implementing the roadmap and the peace 
process, the situation can no longer tolerate 
reluctance, procrastination, or waste of time that is 
affecting everyone and that may in fact be the sword 
of choice for Israel to fight and confront the 
international community, which is exerting pressure to 
prevent the collapse of this current chance (for 
peace)." 
HALE