This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 007147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID CJAN CASC US JO
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR WITH NEW JUSTICE MINISTER: AID, 
EXTRADITION, CHILD CUSTODY 
 
REF: AMMAN 4849 
 
Classified By: Ambassador E. Gnehm for reason 1.5 d 
 
---------------------------- 
Justice Ministry Needs Money 
---------------------------- 
 
¶1. (C) Ambassador, AID Country Director, AID officer and 
PolOff made an October 28 courtesy call on new Justice 
Minister Salah al-Bashir. Bashir requested that AID 
participate in the meeting and used the courtesy call as a 
platform to seek financial assistance for his judicial reform 
plans. Explaining his broad vision for a human rights and 
democratization agenda in the Ministry, he sought quick AID 
assistance for an urgent initial research and strategy phase, 
and also for the later implementation phase. Referring to 
recent polling data (reported reftel) that suggests only a 
60% approval rating of the judicial system, he stated that 
the rate should be higher and sees his plan leading to the 
building of "an inclusive pillar for (Jordanian) state and 
society." 
 
¶2. (C) Bashir mentioned a number of costs facing his 
ministry--including infrastructure, personnel, and 
training--that cannot be met by the Jordanian budget. While 
he reviewed the status of AID, MEPI, and PASA funding, the 
Ambassador clearly pointed out that Bashir's ambitious plans 
would also be hard for the USG to fund, especially as quickly 
as he would like. AID offered to look into assisting with the 
early stage of the research and strategy phase, and post is 
coordinating a response to the Minister's request. 
 
-------------------------- 
Extradition, Child Custody 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador also urged the new government to submit 
the bilateral extradition treaty to parliament for 
ratification. Both agreed that a change in political 
conditions since the time when it was rejected by the 
Jordanian higher court could now lead to its acceptance. The 
ambassador brought the draft child custody MOU to his 
attention, which Bashir promised to review and comment on at 
a later date. 
GNEHM