This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 001915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DS FOR DS/IP/NEA/SA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CE CMGT
SUBJECT:  EAC HELD TO DISCUSS POLITICAL SITUATION IN COLOMBO 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary - Embassy Colombo held an EAC meeting on Nov 
5 to discuss the security situation relative to the Sri 
Lankan President's actions in recent days.  EAC reaffirmed 
that, aside from increased police and army presence dispersed 
lightly throughout the city, Colombo remains calm and without 
incident to date.  A determination was made for CONS to issue 
a Consular Message to assure the American community that the 
Embassy is monitoring political and security developments in 
Sri Lanka. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Embassy Colombo held an EAC meeting on Nov 5 to 
discuss the security situation and political upheaval caused 
by Sri Lankan President Kumaratunga's firing of the Ministers 
of Defense, Interior, and Communications, suspending 
Parliament until November 19, and declaring a State of 
Emergency.  The EAC noted that the situation in Colombo 
remains calm with no incidents of violence or unrest reported 
to date.  RSO advised that the SD Unit has been strategically 
deployed in the city to monitor security developments. 
Increased police and army presence has been reported in 
certain parts of the city, but Embassy operations have not 
been affected.  POL advised that political ramifications of 
the President's actions could not yet be determined, and in 
fact, a complete picture may not be understood for several 
weeks.  DAO advised that his Sri Lankan military contacts 
have informed him that the officer corps is committed to 
following the rule of law.  Embassy tripwires were 
established, the first of which would be a security incident 
or indication of unrest in the streets. The EAC concluded 
that Embassy operations would continue as normal until the 
security situation changed. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Charge' instructed CONS to draft a Consular Message 
for distribution to the American community.  The text of the 
message is as follows: 
 
"As you are probably aware from news reports, there have been 
a number of political developments in Sri Lanka in recent 
days.  The U.S. Embassy in Colombo will continue to monitor 
ongoing events.  The Consular Section's email messaging 
system is our primary method of communicating with Americans 
in Sri Lanka.  Please ensure that your registration 
information is current, and as always, we urge you to be 
cautious and aware of your surroundings." 
 
¶4.  (U) Additional EACs will be convened as necessary. 
 
ENTWISTLE