This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/13/2013 
TAGS: PREL KU
SUBJECT: FIRST REACTION: SHAYKH SABAH APPOINTS NEW CABINET 
 
Classified By: ADCM John G. Moran for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) MFA U/S Ahmed Al-Jarallah shared the names of newly 
appointed Prime Minister Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmed al-Sabah's 
cabinet with the Ambassador on July 14.  U/S Jarallah said 
the names would be formally announced later the same day. 
Following is a list of the new cabinet and initial reactions, 
in no particular order: 
 
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior - Shaykh 
Nawaf al-Ahmed al-Sabah 
 
A brother of both the Amir and Shaykh Sabah, Shaykh Nawaf has 
previously served as Minister of Interior and Minister of 
Defense, both before the Gulf War.  While it came as no 
surprise that former Minister of Interior Mohammed Khaled 
al-Sabah was replaced, (his relationship with Shaykh Sabah 
has been decidedly and publically strained) the choice of 
Shaykh Nawaf to fill his shoes is somewhat disappointing, 
given that Shaykh Nawaf has a reputation of being a 
less-than-forceful Minister. 
 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense - Shaykh Jabir 
al-Mubarak al-Sabah 
 
Although low-key, Minister Jabir proved an important ally in 
completing U.S. requested preparatory tasks prior to OIF. 
 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Acting Minister of Labor and 
Social Affairs - Shaykh Dr. Mohammed al-Sabah 
 
The promotion of Dr. Mohammed to Foreign Minister was 
expected, although he was repeatedly challenged for the post 
by current Minister of Amiri Diwan Affairs Shaykh Nasser 
Mohammed al-Sabah.  He has served ably as Minister of State 
for Foreign Affairs since his return from Washington, and is 
very close to Shaykh Sabah.  The addition of Minister of 
Labor and Social Affairs to his portfolio may aid us 
significantly in our efforts to strengthen labor laws and 
protection for third country workers. 
 
Minister of Health - Dr. Mohammed al-Jarallah 
 
An able technocrat, al-Jarallah worked well with with the 
U.S. military before and during OIF. 
 
Minister of Information - Mohammed Abulhasan 
 
A career diplomat who has served Kuwait well as its U.N. 
PermRep, Abulhasan brings to the table a very astute 
political sense and a keen understanding of U.S. interests. 
His appointment as Minister of Information may be meant as a 
signal to Islamists -- who view the Ministries of Information 
and Education as the high ground in their ideological battle 
-- that the new government will not be cowed by them. 
 
Minister of Education - Dr. Rasheed al-Hamad 
 
A close relative of Arab Fund Director and former Finance 
Minister Abdullatif al-Hamad, Rasheed al-Hamad is a former 
A/S of Education who has spent his entire career working in 
the field.  Although competent, we expect he will have little 
political clout. 
 
Minister of Oil and Minister of Electricity and Water - 
Shaykh Ahmed Fahad 
 
The appointment of Shaykh Ahmed Fahad to these two key 
ministries is indicative of his status as a contender for the 
next generation of Kuwaiti leadership.  Further, and more 
importantly for the USG, it may signal Prime Minister Shaykh 
Sabah al-Ahmed's intention to bring to fruition the long 
delayed AZN power plant and Northern Oilfields projects. 
 
Minister of Housing - Badr al-Humaidhi 
 
The long-time director of the Kuwait fund, al-Humaidhi is an 
interesting choice for a Ministry locally known as the 
"Ministry of Problems," due to large numbers of squabbles and 
complaints it must adjudicate and respond to. 
 
Ministry of Communications - Shaykh Ahmed Abdullah al-Sabah 
retains his portfolio. 
 
Minister of Justice - Ahmed Baquer 
 
A chemist by trade and a Salafi MP, Ahmed Baquer retains his 
post as Minister of Justice, while losing the Ministry of 
Awqaf. 
 
Minister of Awqaf - Abdullah al-Matooq, whom we are told is a 
member of the Muslim Brotherhood. 
 
Minister of Finance - Mahmoud al-Nouri 
Mahmoud al-Nouri is the Chairman of Global Investment House, 
a former Chairman of Kuwait Transport Co and brother of 
former Minister of Education Anwar al-Nouri.  Unlike his 
predecessor, Yousef Ibrahim, al-Nouri is not an economist. 
 
Minister of Trade - Abdullah Taweel 
A liberal with a degree in Computer Science, Taweel is a 
former chairman of the Kuwait Computing Society. 
¶2. (C) The new cabinet has caused no great excitement among 
those of our contacts who are privy to these appointments. 
Post will continue to analyze these developments and provide 
a more in-depth analysis as more information becomes 
available.  Overall, it appears that Shaykh Sabah has chosen 
a cabinet that will largely maintain the status-quo. 
JONES