This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
Department for EAP/BCLTV, EAP/P - K. Bailes 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV VM HUMANR
SUBJECT: PROPOSED PRESS GUIDANCE ON DR. QUE'S DETENTION 
 
REF:  HCMC 259 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Post has notified the HCMC External Relations Office 
(ERO), the local branch of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, of its 
interest in the case of Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, who was detained in 
HCMC on March 17 (reftel).  We have also requested MFA assistance 
in obtaining additional information on the circumstances of his 
detention and general medical condition.  As of COB March 19, the 
ERO was able to confirm only the basic facts as reported reftel. 
They were unable to provide any further clarification on the 
current status of his case, but have promised to continue to seek 
answers on our behalf in the morning.  Post will continue to press 
for additional details. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  In a telephone conversation with Dr. Que's wife the 
afternoon of March 19, she said that she had gone to the Municipal 
Jail today with food, clothing, and medication.  While she had 
been allowed to leave the articles there for Dr. Que, she had not 
been permitted to meet with him.  When she requested an 
opportunity to meet with the Director of the facility, she was 
told that he was in meetings all day.  She plans to return on 
March 20.  In an interesting footnote, an official at the ERO 
mentioned twice today that Post probably had better first-hand 
information on what had happened than the MFA, a likely reference 
to Poloff's visit to Dr. Que's home the previous evening. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Should the need arise, Post recommends the following 
press guidance, on an "if asked" basis: 
 
¶4.  (U)  Begin Press Guidance:  The local office of the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs in Ho Chi Minh City has confirmed that Dr. 
Nguyen Dan Que is currently under detention in Ho Chi Minh City. 
The Consulate General has advised the Ministry of its strong 
interest in the case and asked for additional information on the 
specific circumstances of this prominent democracy activist's 
detention.  The Consulate General is unable to speculate on the 
reasons for his detention at this time. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Begin background:  Dr. Que, an endocrinologist, is HCMC's 
best-known political dissident.  He was taken to the local police 
station from his home at 8:00 p.m. Tuesday evening, March 18, and 
transferred to the Municipal Jail the following day.  While in 
detention, his home was searched and a number of his possessions 
seized.  His current legal status is not clear. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Background continued:  Dr. Que is 60 years old.  He was 
imprisoned from 1978 to 1988, but was never charged or tried for 
any crime.  In 1990, he was again imprisoned, this time after 
being convicted of attempting to overthrow the government (for 
writing and disseminating pro-democracy materials).  He was 
sentenced to 20 years imprisonment to be followed by 5 years house 
arrest.  He was released in a September 1998 amnesty (the first 
prisoner amnesty that saw the release of significant numbers of 
political prisoners). 
 
¶7.  (U)  Background continued:  Since his release, Dr. Que has 
faced varying degrees of harassment, including steady surveillance 
and monitoring of his activities and communications.  His Internet 
and telephone access is regularly restricted.  Dr. Que suffers 
from a bleeding ulcer and an unspecified kidney ailment, both of 
which require medication. 
 
YAMAUCHI