This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 RANGOON 000910 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, EB/IFD/OIA 
STATE PASS USTR 
COMMERCE FOR ITA JEAN KELLY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV KTDB BM OPIC
SUBJECT: BURMA'S INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
 
 
¶1. Table of Contents: 
 
Summary 
Preface: U.S. Investment in Burma Subject to Sanctions 
¶1.    Openness to Foreign Investment 
¶2.    Conversion and Transfer Policies 
¶3.    Expropriation and Compensation 
¶4.    Dispute Settlement 
¶5.    Performance Requirements and Incentives 
¶6.    Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
¶7.    Protection of Property Rights 
¶8.    Transparency of the Regulatory System 
¶9.    Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
¶10. Political Violence 
¶11. Corruption 
¶12. Bilateral Investment Agreements 
¶13. OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
¶14. Labor 
¶15. Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
¶16. Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
 
¶2. Summary:  New U.S. investment in Burma has been illegal 
since 1997.  New sanctions imposed in 2003 ban imports of 
Burmese products into the United States and forbid all 
financial transactions between a U.S. person and Burma. 
Burma is a country blessed with extensive natural resources, 
low labor costs, and a great potential for tourism.  It is 
also a member of ASEAN.  However, even if U.S. sanctions were 
removed, an extraordinarily hostile investment climate would 
hold U.S. investment as it has held all other investment to a 
very low level. 
 
Though local investment laws are liberal on the surface, 
their implementation is racked, at all levels, with 
corruption.  The ruling military junta, the State Peace and 
Development Council (SPDC), despite pledging itself to an 
"open door" economic policy and urging foreign firms to 
invest, regularly comes out with punitive and capricious 
regulations, which make investment for foreigners difficult 
if not impossible. 
 
Our view of the current investment climate is very dim.  We 
have not seen any movement toward reform in recent years and 
expect none in the next year.  In fact, if recent events are 
any indication, the situation for investors could well become 
worse before it improves. End summary. 
 
¶3. Preface:  U.S. Investment Subject to Sanctions 
 
On May 20, 1997, by Executive Order 13047, the President 
imposed economic sanctions prohibiting new investment by U.S. 
persons or entities in Burma (Myanmar).  Those sanctions were 
based on the President's determination that the Government of 
Burma (GOB) has committed large-scale repression of the 
democratic opposition.  The Cohen-Feinstein Amendment to the 
Foreign Operations Act of 1997 formed the legal basis for the 
investment ban.  The U.S. government every six months reviews 
sanctions policy.  Since sanctions were imposed in 1997, the 
State Department has found no measurable progress toward 
political liberalization in Burma. 
 
Prior to the imposition of sanctions, a number of 
high-profile U.S. investors had already withdrawn from Burma. 
 An active anti-Burma consumer movement in the U.S. caused 
investing in Burma to be high risk in terms of corporate 
image.  The federal investment sanctions ban new investment 
but allow companies already invested in Burma to remain. 
 
The 1997 ban on new investment is in addition to a number of 
sanctions the U.S. imposed against Burma following the 
military crackdown against civilian democracy activists in 
1988 and the failed election of 1990.  The U.S. opposes the 
extension of international financial assistance to Burma, 
prohibits military sales, suspended economic aid and 
commercial assistance programs, banned the issuance of U.S. 
visas to members of the military, political, and economic 
elite, and downgraded our representation in Rangoon from 
Ambassador to Charge.  In addition, the U.S. continues to 
engage in a vigorous diplomatic effort to promote political 
and human rights reforms. 
 
Since the early 1990's U.S. commercial policy toward Burma 
had been neither to encourage nor to discourage trade or 
investment.  With the 1997 investment ban, that policy was 
revised to prohibit new investment. 
 
¶4. Openness to Foreign Investment 
 
With a view to attracting foreign investment, the Burmese 
government instituted the Foreign Investment Law (FIL) on 
November 30, 1988.  The basic priorities of foreign 
investment, according to the FIL, are as follows: 
 
(a) Promotion and expansion of exports; 
(b) Exploitation of natural resources that require heavy 
investment; 
(c) Acquisition of high technology; 
(d) Support for production and services requiring large 
amount of capital; 
(e) Expansion of Employment opportunities; 
(f) Development of facilities that would reduce energy 
consumption; and, 
(g) Regional development. 
 
According to the State-owned Economic Enterprises Law, 
enacted in March 1989, the Government state-owned enterprises 
have the sole right to carry out the following economic 
activities: 
 
(a) Extraction of teak and sale of the same in the country 
and abroad; 
(b) Cultivation and conservation of forest plantations with 
the exception of village-owned firewood plantations 
cultivated by the villagers for their personal use; 
(c) Exploration, extraction, sale, and production of 
petroleum and natural gas; 
(d) Exploration, extraction, and export of pearls, jade and 
precious stones; 
(e) Breeding and production of fish and prawns in fisheries 
which have been reserved for research by the Government; 
(f) Postal and telecommunications services; 
(g) Air transport and railway transport services; 
(h) Banking and insurance services; 
(i) Broadcasting and television services; 
(j) Exploration, extraction, and exports of metals; 
(k) Electricity generating services other than those 
permitted by law to private and cooperative electricity 
generating services; and, 
(l) Manufacturing of products relating to security and 
defense. 
 
However, the law provides that the Myanmar Investment 
Commission (MIC) may, "in the interest of the State," make 
exceptions.  Exceptions have been made in areas such as banks 
(though not for foreign investors), petroleum and natural gas 
extraction, and air services.  This discretion, though, like 
most else resides in the hands of the cabinet and senior 
generals. 
 
According to the FIL, the MIC must review all investment, 
either foreign or domestic.  However, due to corruption 
within the MIC, the ruling State Peace and Development 
Council (SPDC) removed much of the MIC,s real influence at 
the end of 1999.  Potential investors must still work through 
the MIC, but it has lost the authority to make a decision. 
Interested foreign companies still approach and submit 
proposals through the MIC, which in turn gets approval from 
either the Cabinet (chaired by SPDC Chairman and Prime 
Minister Senior General Than Shwe) or the Trade Policy 
Council (TPC, chaired by SPDC Vice Senior General Maung Aye). 
 The Cabinet and the TPC have the same membership so the 
choice of decision-making body is made on a case-by-case 
basis.  Though MIC has no power or authority to protect 
foreign companies, we have no evidence of overt 
discrimination against foreign investors. 
Once the government grants permission to invest, a foreign 
company must get a "Permit to Trade" (essentially a business 
license) from the Ministry of National Planning and Economic 
Development's Directorate of Investment and Companies 
Administration (DICA).  In a typical "Catch 22" that has for 
all intents and purposes closed Burma to most new foreign 
investment, since February 2002 the government is no longer 
permitting DICA to issue new permits or renew existing ones 
for foreign firms.  This decision has disrupted the business 
of many foreign investors, and forced closure of several 
foreign manufacturing firms. 
 
In theory once a company has the "Permit to Trade" it may 
then use it to get residence visa status, lease cars and real 
estate, etc., and to get import and export licenses from the 
Ministry of Commerce.  The Ministry of Commerce has had a 
policy in place since the end of 2001, though there is 
nothing in writing, to only issue import licenses to those 
firms who are export earners. 
 
The existing foreign investment law and its procedures are 
positive for investors on paper.  However, in practice, it is 
very difficult to make the system work properly due to poor 
transparency and corruption all along the line.  The senior 
generals making the decisions do not seriously consider the 
law when they want to take action for or against investors. 
 
The FIL allows for FDI as a wholly foreign-owned venture or a 
joint venture with any Burmese partner (individual, private 
company, or state-owned company).  Sole proprietorships or 
partnerships are equally acceptable.  Overall, the FIL 
requires that at least 35 percent of equity capital in all 
JVs and partnerships be foreign-owned.  Officially, the 
minimum foreign investment is $500,000 for manufacturing 
investments and $300,000 for services. 
 
The military, via the military economic enterprises, the 
Union of Myanmar Economic Holdings, Ltd. (UMEHL) and the 
Myanmar Economic Corporation (MEC), is involved in many 
economic activities.  To set up a joint venture, foreign 
firms have reported that it is useful to be affiliated with 
MEHL or MEC in order to receive the proper business permits. 
Nonetheless, entering into business with MEHL or MEC does not 
guarantee success for the foreign partner, and some foreign 
investors report that their military partners are parasitic, 
making unreasonable demands, providing no cost-sharing, and 
sometimes muscling out the foreign investor after an 
investment is up and running. 
 
¶5. Conversion and Transfer Policies 
 
According to the Foreign Investment Law, investors in Burma 
have a guarantee that they can repatriate profits (after 
taxes).  The law also provides that, upon expiry of the term 
of the contract, the investor of foreign capital has the 
right to the foreign currency in which the investment was 
made.  However, due to the shortage of foreign exchange it is 
in reality not easy for foreign investors to legally transfer 
their net profits abroad.  Foreign currency can be 
transferred abroad only after obtaining permission from the 
Foreign Exchange Management Department of the Central Bank of 
Myanmar. 
 
Likewise, multiple exchange rates in Burma make conversion 
and repatriation of foreign exchange very complex and ripe 
for corruption.  The official rate of 6 kyat to the dollar is 
grossly overvalued.  The government issues Foreign Exchange 
Certificates (FEC) that trade somewhat closer to the market 
rate but are still overvalued.  Generally speaking, foreign 
companies get rid of kyat earnings as quickly as possible -- 
usually by purchasing FEC or dollars at some variant of the 
market rate.  The government has allowed foreign companies to 
use dollars or FEC to pay utility and telephone bills, and 
rental charges.  It has also allowed foreign firms to deposit 
dollars in a state bank for withdrawal as FEC by the 
company's employees. 
In Burma, only three state banks, the Myanma Economic Bank 
(MEB), the Myanma Investment and Commercial Bank (MICB), and 
the Myanma Foreign Trade Bank (MFTB) are allowed to deal with 
foreign exchange transactions.  In practice the MFTB and MICB 
handle most of these transactions.  The MFTB mainly handles 
foreign currency transactions of government organizations, 
businesses, and individuals, and the MICB caters primarily to 
companies and joint ventures.  MEB handles foreign currency 
transactions in border trade regions. 
 
Because most of Burma,s international trade is done in U.S. 
dollars, the restrictions on provisions of financial services 
by U.S. banks will cause serious disruption to the legal 
foreign trading system.  U.S. banks will no longer be able to 
offer trade facilitation or correspondent banking services, 
making the use of U.S. dollar letters of credit problematic. 
 
As of July 29, 2003, the correspondent accounts of MEB, MFTB, 
and MICB in the United States are frozen, along with all 
other assets and property. 
 
Private banks, despite assuming a large share of banking 
activity in the last several years, are not permitted to deal 
in foreign exchange.  In February 2003 there was a major run 
on private banks, and as of now their future is uncertain. 
However, there is no indication that if the private banking 
system is revitalized it will be given the right to deal in 
foreign currency. 
 
¶6. Expropriation and Compensation 
 
The Burmese Foreign Investment Law provides guarantees 
against nationalization during the investment's "permitted 
period" of investment.  However, a number of foreign firms in 
various sectors have been forced to leave the country when 
the terms and conditions of their investment agreements have 
not been honored.  In recent years two large Japanese firms 
exited Burma after they found they were not able to operate 
as they had been led to believe.  Additionally, there have 
been cases where the government has seized the assets of 
foreign and local investors (without compensation), when the 
investment turned out to be very profitable. 
 
The most recent example we know of is the case of a Swiss 
cement importer and distributor that was forced out 
ostensibly because it was not operating according to its 
permit.  In reality, the government turned the company out, 
after significant investment in plant and equipment, because 
the investor was able to sell better quality, cheaper cement 
than its government-controlled competitors.   In another case 
in 1999-2000, the military-owned MEC confiscated a large 
brewery that an expatriate Burmese businesswoman had made 
profitable.  The local courts were not helpful and to date 
the investor has been unable to get compensation from the GOB. 
 
¶7. Dispute Settlement 
 
Private and foreign companies are at a disadvantage in 
disputes with government organizations.  Arbitration is 
addressed under the 1944 Arbitration Act.  Foreign investors 
generally prefer to use international arbitration, though the 
Burmese government will try to stipulate local arbitration in 
contracts it signs with foreign investors.   If handled 
locally, difficulties arise since the central leadership 
controls the whole legal mechanism.  The courts are not 
independent and cannot make free and fair decisions.  There 
is no recourse available for companies who face an adverse 
administrative decision.  Burma is not a member of the 
International Center for the Settlement of Investment 
Disputes nor is it a party to the New York Convention. 
 
The legal system in Burma is ostensibly under the control of 
the Attorney General's Office and the Supreme Court. 
However, neither the Attorney General nor the Supreme Court 
is independent.  Burmese criminal and civil laws are modeled 
on British law as practiced during the colonial period -- 
which ended in 1948.  Every township, state, and division has 
its own law officers and judges.  However, the township, 
state and divisional SPDC branches have supreme authority 
over judicial decisions at the local level. 
 
There is no bankruptcy law in Burma. 
 
Foreign companies have the right to bring cases, and defend 
themselves, in local courts.  However, as the SPDC ruling 
junta controls all the courts, foreign investors who have had 
conflicts with the local government, or even had their 
business illegally expropriated, have had little luck getting 
compensation. 
 
¶8. Performance Requirements and Incentives 
 
Officially, companies covered under the Foreign Investment 
Law are entitled to a tax holiday period of three consecutive 
years.  Under the law this tax holiday can be extended with 
permission of the Myanmar Investment Commission (MIC). 
Investors are also eligible, at the MIC,s discretion, for a 
number of other incentives including: accelerated 
depreciation of capital assets, a waiver of customs duties 
and taxes on imported machinery and spare parts during the 
period of construction, or on imported raw materials during 
the first three years of commercial production, etc.  Again, 
the TPC and the Cabinet, not the MIC, make decisions on these 
incentives and extensions. 
 
There are no official performance requirements for new 
foreign investors in Burma, but the government does require 
an investor purchase local machinery, fire, marine, and 
personal liability insurance.  Unofficially, the government 
often requires companies to commit to a certain level of 
exports before being allowed to invest.  The government then 
requires compliance reports every three months with evidence 
of export or explanation why the goals were not met.  We have 
no evidence that action is taken against firms that do not 
meet their initial export targets. 
 
There is no requirement that foreign investors buy or hire 
from local sources.  Technology transfer is not generally a 
pre-requisite for investment. 
 
According to Burmese law, any enterprise operating under the 
Foreign Investment Law or the Myanmar Companies Act must pay 
a 30 percent income tax rate.  Withholding tax on royalties 
and interest is 15 percent for resident foreigners and 20 
percent for non-resident foreigners.  Tax collection in Burma 
is very lax, but foreign investors are an easy target for the 
cash-strapped tax authorities.  The Burmese fiscal year ends 
March 31 and tax returns are due by June 30. 
 
A surprising reversal of the government's mantra of "open 
door economy" came in a February 2002 verbal directive which 
outlawed the issuance of new, or renewal of existing, 
"Permits to Trade" for trading firms owned by foreigners (or 
by foreigners and Burmese).  This was done ostensibly to 
promote local trading firms, but has served only to further 
distort the local marketplace.  The authorities have not 
published any official notice of this directive but it is 
being enforced, including against foreigners who have tried 
to evade the directive by listing their company under the 
name of a Burmese colleague or friend. 
 
¶9. Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
 
By law, foreigners may not own land, and may only rent 
property on a short-term basis. 
 
A private entity can establish, buy, sell, and own a business 
only with the review and approval of the MIC (and by proxy 
the top leadership). 
 
¶10. Protection of Property Rights 
 
Burma does not yet have adequate IPR protection.  Patent, 
trademark, and copyright laws and regulations are all 
deficient.  Thus Burma is unlikely to meet WTO TRIPS 
obligations in the near to medium term.  After Burma joined 
ASEAN in 1997, it agreed to modernize its intellectual 
property laws in accordance with the ASEAN Framework 
Agreement on Intellectual Property Cooperation.  However, an 
IPR law, first drafted in 1994, still awaits approval and 
implementation.  A Patents and Design Act was introduced in 
1946, but never brought into force.  Thus the Indian Patents 
and Designs Act of 1911, which was enacted under British 
colonial rule, continues to govern the registration of 
patents and designs. 
 
Piracy of music CDs, video CDs, CD-ROMS, DVDs, books, 
software, and designs is evident nationwide, especially in 
the two major urban centers of Mandalay and Rangoon. 
However, given the small number of customers (most Burmese 
are too poor), and the lack of adequate infrastructure (e.g., 
reliable electricity), we do not believe piracy has a 
significant adverse impact on U.S. products, which, are in 
any case, not readily available.  There is little evidence of 
widespread use of pirated software and hardware by government 
agencies, though the nascent computer and IT sector often 
relies on pirated software for training courses and other 
uses. 
 
Burma has no trademark law, though trademark registration is 
possible.  Some firms place a trademark caution notice in the 
local newspaper, declaring ownership of their trademarks. 
Once this notice has been published, criminal and/or civil 
action can be taken against trademark infringers.  Title to a 
trademark depends on use of the trademark in connection with 
goods sold in Burma.  While a Copyright Act was promulgated 
in 1914, no means to register a copyright was ever 
instituted.  There is thus no legal protection in Burma for 
foreign copyrights. 
 
In the vast majority of cases, real estate is purchased with 
cash or using regular bank loans.  However, there are a few 
banks that offer rudimentary mortgage facilities.  Foreigners 
may not generally avail themselves of this, though, because 
they may not own land. 
 
¶11. Transparency of the Regulatory System 
 
Burma is notorious among foreign businesspeople for its 
complete lack of regulatory and legal transparency.  All 
existing regulations, including those covering foreign 
investment, import-export procedures, licensing, foreign 
exchange, etc., are subject to change, with no advance 
notice, at the whim of the senior ruling generals.  The 
economic decision-makers here are influenced strongly by 
wealthy cronies, the demands of state-owned enterprises, and 
of the military-controlled Myanmar Economic Corporation and 
the Myanmar Economic Holdings Ltd.  The government also 
regularly issues new regulations with no notice and with no 
opportunity for review or comment by any non-governmental 
domestic or any foreign market participants.  Furthermore, 
new regulations or regulatory changes are rarely published. 
Instead, they are communicated verbally to interested 
parties.  If a new regulation or law is published it will 
appear in the government's mouthpiece newspaper, the New 
Light of Myanmar (Myanma A'Lin or in the Burma Gazette. 
 
Burma's health, environmental, tax, and labor laws as written 
do not impose a major burden on investment.  However, the 
protean nature of the regulatory and legal situation -- and 
the irregular enforcement of existing laws -- makes 
investment tricky without good, and well-connected, local 
legal advice. 
 
¶12. Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
 
Burma has no true equity or debt markets, and the notion of 
portfolio investment is not well understood by the average 
person.   Burmese authorities have said in the past that the 
existence of capital markets is essential for the development 
of a well-functioning financial system.  To this end, the 
Myanmar Economic Bank (MEB) and Japan's Daiwa Institute of 
Research Co. Ltd. established a joint venture, the Myanma 
Security Exchange Centre Ltd., to set up a stock exchange. 
This exchange is in existence, though moribund, with only one 
listed company -- a forestry joint venture.  A few companies 
have also begun to sell bonds privately and on a very small 
scale.  Private companies, both foreign and domestically 
controlled, are generally small and thus their shares are 
closely held by a small number of people or entities -- often 
within a family.  There is a securities law being drafted 
now, but no interested private parties have been allowed to 
see, or comment on, the draft. 
 
A large bank run in February 2003, and the subsequent 
decision by the government to avoid bailouts, has effectively 
cut off the private banking system from the market. The 
state-owned and semi state-owned banks were not impacted by 
this crisis.  Government instructions and internal bank 
policies have made it impossible for private banks to take in 
new deposits or loans, and weekly withdrawals are capped. 
Currently the private banks are in limbo, the government 
indecisive for now on whether to liquidate, actively 
restructure, or rescue the troubled institutions. 
 
Foreign firms do not have access to bank loans since the 
banks require collateral of land or real estate, neither of 
which foreigners can own.  Since mid-2002 the use of gold as 
collateral has been forbidden.  Loans in kyat are available 
for local companies and individuals from state and, until 
February 2003, private banks.  Interest rates are currently 
running about 15 percent per year with inflation about 3 
times that.  Because of these negative real interest rates, a 
lack of adequate supervision, and a shortage of banking 
experience the private banking system, even at its peak, was 
very unstable.  Private banks engaged in reckless lending and 
suffered high levels of non-performing loans.  Though 
statistics are not available, it is believed that public 
banks, forced to bankroll the regime's pet projects and 
personal needs, also have extremely large numbers of 
non-performing loans. 
 
A 1990 banking law permitted foreign banks to open branches 
in Burma but not to conduct business in the local market. 
These offices may serve as a trade and commercial liaison for 
local and foreign clients.   For a variety of reasons, 
including the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, the 
slow local business climate, and the lack of liberalization 
of the banking sector, most of the original 49 foreign banks 
have left Burma, or downgraded their representation, in the 
past five years.   U.S. persons may not provide financial 
services to Burma. 
 
Burma has no standard accounting system.  International 
accounting firms in country, though they may offer only 
"consulting services," adhere to the General Accepted 
Accounting Principles (GAAP).  We have heard that the Burmese 
government is trying to establish a separate Myanmar 
Accounting Principles (MAP) system, but this is still on the 
drawing board. 
 
¶13.  Political Violence 
 
In May 2003, government-affiliated thugs ambushed a convoy 
carrying opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi while she was 
traveling in northwest Burma.  Dozens were killed or wounded 
during the attack.  Two bombs went off in downtown Rangoon in 
early 2003.  A small incendiary device exploded at a downtown 
pagoda in 1996, and Burmese authorities reportedly found 
other bomb devices in 1999 and 2000.  The military government 
tightened security around the international airport in 
Rangoon after two RPG devices were discovered near the 
airport in early 2002. 
 
Burma experienced major political unrest in 1988 when the 
military regime jailed and/or killed an undetermined number 
of Burmese democracy activists.  In 1990, the military 
government refused to recognize the results of an election 
that the opposition won overwhelmingly.  Burma experienced 
major student demonstrations in 1996, and demonstrations 
occurred in August and September of 1998.  Popular unrest and 
violence continue to be possible. 
 
For the last decade there has been sporadic anti-government 
insurgent activity in various locations, such as an attack on 
a natural gas pipeline in the Tanintharyi Division and bomb 
attacks against family members of senior military officials 
in Rangoon.  Chin and Arakan States and the Thai-Burma border 
area in Burma's southern Shan, Mon, Karenni, and Karen States 
have been the scenes of occasional fighting between 
government forces and various insurgent groups.  In February 
2001, several people were killed and some tourists left 
stranded during shelling and cross-border gunfire in the town 
of Tachileik, Shan State.  The Thai-Burma border is closed 
from time to time due to increased insurgent activity, most 
recently in 2002. 
 
¶14.  Corruption 
 
Corruption is systemic in Burma and is considered by 
economists and businesspeople to be one of the most serious 
barriers to investment and doing business in Burma.  Because 
of the Byzantine and capricious regulatory environment, 
rent-seeking activities are rampant and very little can be 
accomplished, from the micro to the macro, without paying 
"tea money."  We think this problem will only get worse at 
all levels as inflation and the erosion of the kyat further 
impoverish government bureaucrats and as senior leaders seek 
additional income from a shrinking number of investment 
projects. 
 
Corruption is a jailable offense in Burma, and has been since 
¶1948.  However, the anti-corruption statute is applied only 
when the senior generals want to take action against some 
official who has become an embarrassment.  In all other cases 
corruption is considered a very normal practice -- indeed a 
requirement for survival.   The major, though by no means 
only, areas where investors run into corruption are: when 
seeking investment permission, taxation, when applying for 
import and export licenses, and, when negotiating land and 
real estate leases. 
 
¶15.  Bilateral Investment Agreements 
 
Burma has signed bilateral investment agreements, known as 
"Protection and Promotion of Investment" agreements with the 
Philippines, the PRC, and Vietnam.  Except for increasing 
investment from the PRC, these agreements have had little 
impact on incoming investment from Vietnam or the Philippines. 
 
¶16.  OPIC and Other Insurance Programs 
 
Due to U.S. law OPIC does not operate in Burma.  Burma is not 
a member of the World Bank's Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA). 
 
¶17.  Labor 
 
In 1989, the United States withdrew Burma's eligibility for 
benefits under the generalized system of preferences (GSP) 
due to the absence of internationally recognized worker 
rights.  Labor unions are illegal in Burma.  Workers are 
unable to organize, negotiate, or in any other way exercise 
control over their working conditions.  Although regulations 
set a minimum employment age and wage, and maximum work 
hours, these are not uniformly observed, especially in 
private factories and other establishments.  The government 
uses forced adult labor in infrastructure construction and 
porterage for the military in active combat zones.  These 
labor practices are not consistent with Burma's obligations 
under ILO Conventions 29 and 87, and thus explain why the ILO 
imposed sanctions against Burma in 2000.  The United States 
strongly supported this decision. 
 
Burma,s cost of labor is very low, even compared to some of 
its Southeast Asian neighbors.  Burmese over the age of 40, 
and particularly those over 65, tend to be very well 
educated.  However, a sad side effect of the repeated closing 
of Burmese universities over the past 15 years is that the 
current 15-30 year old demographic is sorely lacking in 
technical skills.  Many Burmese, though, speak at least some 
level of English.  Many educated Burmese studied English in 
mission schools during the British colonial and early 
independence period.  After the nationalization of private 
and mission schools in 1964, the socialist government 
mandated English courses in school starting from the middle 
school.  However, soon thereafter then-dictator General Ne 
Win ordered that English instruction begin in kindergarten 
after his daughter failed an English exam and was rejected 
for studies in the U.K. 
 
The government does not publish unemployment figures. 
However, anecdotal evidence and the recent divestment by many 
foreign companies, support the assumption of a very high 
level of unemployed and underemployed in non-agricultural 
sectors.  An average factory worker in Burma will make about 
500-800 kyat per day. 
 
¶18.  Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
 
The government has set aside as "industrial zones" large 
tracts of land surrounding Rangoon and Mandalay.  However, 
these zones are merely zoned for industry and do not come 
with any investment incentives. 
 
There are no free trade zones in Burma. 
 
¶19.  Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
 
Note:  Investment figures published by the GOB include only 
investment approved by the Myanmar Investment Commission 
(MIC).  These figures do not include investments not 
submitted for MIC approval, such as a myriad of small and 
medium Chinese projects. 
 
According to government figures at the end of March 2003, 
cumulative foreign investment approved by the MIC totaled 371 
projects, valued at US$7.5 billion.  This amount is 1.2 
percent higher than the cumulative total listed at the end of 
March 2002.   However, it should be noted that this 
cumulative number does not factor in subsequent divestment, 
or investment that was approved but that did not actually 
enter the country. 
 
Extrapolating from the latest government statistics on FDI 
flow for the Burmese FY 2002-03 (April-March), we estimate a 
357 percent year-on-year increase in new FDI approvals 
($86.95 million) in 4 sectors compared with total new 
investment approvals in FY 2001-02 ($19.002 million).  The 
new investments came from Malaysia ($44 million in oil and 
gas and $18.25 million in fishery), Hong Kong ($12.88 million 
in manufacturing), Singapore ($6.1 million in fishery), 
Switzerland ($3.38 million in mining), Brunei ($2.04 million 
in fishery) and Korea ($0.3 million in manufacturing). 
 
Despite the hangover from the Asian financial crisis, the 
trickle of approved new investment since 1997 has come almost 
exclusively from Asian countries.  Malaysia, Singapore, 
Switzerland, and Korea registered new investment in Burma in 
FY 2002-03.  Western countries have largely stayed away from 
the Burma market.  U.S. investment has been zero since 1997 
when the U.S. government imposed an investment ban. 
 
In stock terms, the United States is the fifth largest 
foreign investor in Burma with 16 projects totaling US$582 
million.  U.S. investment approved prior to May 1997, which 
was grandfathered under the U.S. investment sanctions order, 
is largely centered in oil and natural gas exploration.  The 
small number of other U.S. firms in Burma is involved 
primarily in tourism, management, consulting, and trading. 
While Malaysia is ranked 4th in FDI stock, it was 1st in new 
FDI agreements in 2002-03 (according to Burmese government 
statistics).  These official statistics do not take into 
consideration considerable new investment, some of it 
state-financed, from the PRC. 
 
Major non-U.S. foreign investors in Burma are: Petronas 
(Malaysia), Total (France), Ivanhoe Mines (Canada), PTT, Plc. 
(Thailand), Shin Satellite (Thailand), Keppel Land 
(Singapore), China National Construction and Agricultural 
Machinery Import and Export Co. (PRC), and the China 
International Trust and Investment Corporation (PRC). 
 
So far there is no concrete evidence of large-scale 
investment abroad by Burmese companies.  However, we believe 
that some wealthy Burmese individuals and small family 
businesses have made a few investments in neighboring ASEAN 
countries. 
 
 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT OF PERMITTED ENTERPRISES AS OF 
3/31/2003 BY SECTOR 
 
                  (US$ million) 
                  Approved    In percent of Total 
No.   Particulars No.   Amount      Approved Amount 
 
¶1.    Oil and Gas 56    2,403.17    32.0 
¶2.    Manufacturing     150   1,604.07    21.4 
¶3.    Hotels and Tourism      43    1,059.66    14.1 
¶4.    Real Estate 18    1,025.14    13.7 
¶5.    Mining      52    526.74      7.0 
¶6.    Livestock and Fisheries 23    309.76      4.1 
¶7.    Transport and Communications  14    283.27      3.8 
¶8.    Industrial Estates      3     193.11      2.6 
¶9.    Construction      2     37.77 0.5 
¶10.   Agriculture 4     34.35 0.5 
¶11.   Other Services    6     23.69 0.3 
 
      Total 371   7500.73     100.0 
 
FOREIGN INVESTMENT OF PERMITTED ENTERPRISES AS OF 
3/31/2003 BY COUNTRY 
 
                  (US$ Million) 
No.   Particulars No.   Approved Amount 
 
¶1.    Singapore   72    1,572.73 
¶2.    U.K. (a)    37    1,404.01 
¶3.    Thailand    49    1,290.20 
¶4.    Malaysia    33    660.75 
¶5.    U.S.A.      16    582.06 
¶6.    France      3     470.37 
¶7.    Indonesia   12    241.50 
¶8.    The Netherlands   5     238.83 
¶9.    Japan 23    212.57 
¶10.   Hong Kong   29    162.72 
¶11.   The Republic of Korea   32    156.41 
¶12.   Philippines 2     146.67 
¶13.   Australia   14    82.08 
¶14.   Austria     2     72.50 
¶15.   China 13    64.15 
¶16.   Canada      16    59.78 
¶17.   Panama      1     29.10 
¶18.   Germany     1     15.00 
¶19.   Denmark     1     13.37 
¶20.   Cyprus      1     5.25 
¶21.   India 1     4.50 
¶22.   Macau 2     4.40 
¶23.   Switzerland 1     3.38 
¶24.   Bangladesh  2     2.96 
¶25.   Israel      1     2.40 
¶26.   Brunei Darussalam 1     2.04 
¶27.   Sri Lanka   1     1.00 
 
      Total 371   7500.73 
 
(a) Inclusive of enterprises incorporated in British Virgin 
Islands, Bermuda, and the Cayman Islands. 
McMullen