This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KATHMANDU 001743 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, S/CT, AND DS 
ISLAMABAD FOR AMBASSADOR POWELL 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY 
NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV NP GON
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  PARTIES CONTINUE PROTESTS, GOVERNMENT 
REACTION "EXEMPLARY" 
 
REF: KATHMANDU 1713 
 
¶1.  (U) On September 8, the five major political parties 
continued with their fifth day of protest in Kathmandu, 
culminating in the arrest of an estimated 90-100 people in 
various parts of the city.  The parties have called off the 
protest scheduled for September 9 because of a Newari 
festival day.  However, the parties will continue with their 
final day of protest on September 10.  The protests over the 
last five days have been modest in size, well disciplined, 
and non-violent.  On September 8, Arjun Narasingha K.C., 
spokesperson for the Nepali Congress party, reported to the 
Ambassador that the police response to the protests has been 
"exemplary." 
 
¶2.  (U) The Embassy's Political Specialist contacted each of 
the party headquarters to learn how many of their members had 
been arrested and released.  As of the morning of September 8 
(not including this afternoon's arrests): 
 
-- The Communist Party of Nepal-United Marxist Leninist (UML) 
reported 1,050 members arrested, including five Central 
Committee members.  While the police have released 900, 
Central Committee member Bam Dev Gautum, arrested September 
7, and 150 others remain in police custody. 
 
-- The Nepali Congress (NC) Kathmandu Office Secretary, 
Sobhakar Parajuli, reports that roughly 900 party members 
have been arrested and 694 have been released.  Seven leaders 
of the party have been arrested with only Central Committee 
member Lila Koirala, arrested September 7, still in custody. 
 
-- The Nepal Sadbhavana Party (Anandi Devi) faction had 93 
members arrested with all but nine released.  Three party 
leaders arrested during the protest have already been 
released. 
 
-- 125 People's Front Nepal (PFN) members were arrested, 
including the party President.  The Party President and 81 
party members have been released. 
 
-- The smallest member of the coalition, the Nepal Workers 
and Peasants Party (NWPP), reported that 66 members were 
arrested--43 have now been released. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Comment:  The parties have successfully 
demonstrated against the Government's temporary ban on the 
right to assemble, while the police have maintained order in 
a professional manner.  The protests, despite significant 
concerns of Maoist infiltration (Reftel), were carried out 
without serious incident.  It is rumored that the parties' 
leaders will head the program on the last day of the joint 
agitation, September 10.  The protest coincides with the 
return of King Gyanendra, who has been out of the country 
since August 24.  Party leaders continue to seek some signal 
from the Palace that the King may be willing to come to a 
political understanding with the estranged parties. 
MALINOWSKI