This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 000627 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2013 
TAGS: PREL
SUBJECT: (C) GOK TO PUSH INCLUSION OF 1441 LANGUAGE IN NAM 
STATEMENT; IRAQI PLEAS TO ARAB MEMBERS FALL UPON DEAF EARS 
 
REF: STATE 47493 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Richard H. Jones for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: On February 21, the Ambassador delivered 
reftel points to Kuwaiti Minister for Amiri Diwan Affairs 
Shaykh Nasser Mohammed, who assured him that the GOK fully 
understands the need to support UNSCR 1441 during the 
Non-Aligned Movement's (NAM) session in Kuala Lumpur.  Shaykh 
Nasser said he had spoken with First Deputy Prime Minister 
and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmad 
al-Sabah, who had instructed the GOK delegation to push for 
the inclusion of 1441-specific language in the expected NAM 
statement on Iraq.  In addition, Shaykh Nasser claimed Iraqi 
delegate Hasan al-Musawi had approached Arab NAM 
member-states seeking support, but had been largely rebuffed. 
 End Summary. 
 
GOK to push 1441 language 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) On February 21, the Ambassador reviewed the texts of 
two draft statements provided him by Minister of Amiri Diwan 
Affairs Shaykh Nasser Mohammed and now circulating in Kuala 
Lumpur (both have been faxed to the desk).  Finding both 
texts lacking any specific references to UNSCR 1441 or Iraq's 
obligation to disarm, the Ambassador called Shaykh Nasser 
and expressed his concern that any NAM statement include 
language condemning Iraq's non-compliance with UNSCR 1441 and 
reaffirming Iraq's obligation to disarm (reftel).  After 
speaking with First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Shaykh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Sabah, Shaykh Nasser 
called the Ambassador back to inform him that FM Sabah 
concurs, and had instructed the GOK delegation in Kuala 
Lumpur -- now led by Minister of State for Foreign Affairs 
Shaykh Dr. Mohammed Al-Sabah, who is well-versed on these 
issues -- to advocate for the inclusion of language calling 
upon the Iraqi regime to fully comply with resolution 1441. 
 
Iraqi envoy surrounded by "spies" 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) During previous discussions on February 21, Shaykh 
Nasser told the Ambassador that Iraqi PermRep al-Musawi had 
approached delegates of Arab NAM member-states in a desperate 
effort to gain their support for Iraq.  Calling the rest of 
the Iraqi delegation Saddam's "spies," Musawi told the 
delegates he was just doing his job and he feared for his 
safety should he return to Iraq without a NAM statement 
condemning the possible use of force in Iraq.  According to 
Kuwaiti reports, Shaykh Nasser said, Syria, Sudan, Jordan and 
Lebanon had all told Musawi not to count on their support. 
In addition, the UAE delegate explained that his government 
would be acting in a unified position with other GCC states, 
not unilaterally.  Of the countries Musawi approached, Nasser 
said, only Yemen had indicated it might be willing to support 
Iraq.  The Minister suggested to the Ambassador that the U.S. 
might have more weight with Yemen than Kuwait. 
JONES