This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 001597 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: UPON ANNOUNCEMENT BY OSD-ASD (PA) 
TAGS: MARR PREL NL
SUBJECT: BASE REALIGNMENT - ROUND 31 CONSULTATIONS 
 
REF: STATE 101373 
 
Classified By: Mary Daly for reasons 1.5 (B) & (D) 
 
¶1.  (S) Per reftel we notified the GONL of our desire to 
begin consultations on facilities in Brunssum and 
Vriezenveen.  In response, the NL Ministry of Defense 
requested face-to-face consultations to be conducted with MG 
van der List, Director for Personal and Organization, Royal 
Netherlands Army.  Following these consultations, the GONL 
responded formally via letter to ODC Chief Col. Rumohr.  Text 
follows. 
 
¶2.  (S) BEGIN TEXT: Pursuant to what we discussed on  6 June, 
this is to inform you about our points of view with regard to 
the intended closure of the APS sites in The Netherlands by 
the United States of America: 
 
The Netherlands Ministry of Defense is aware of the fact that 
the reduction of APS activities has been going on for a 
number of years and that possible consequences for the Dutch 
sites could be anticipated. 
 
The 30 September 2003 closure date as mentioned in the "note 
verbale" deviates from that stated in article VIII of the 
General Arrangement concerning storage in the Netherlands by 
US Forces with regard to the notification period in case of a 
closure.  In accordance with this agreement, a 12-month 
notification period should be observed. 
 
If the APS sites at Brunssum and Vriezenveen will be closed, 
the Wainwright-Volkers agreement will be applicable. 
 
In view of the projected personnel reductions in the 
Netherlands Ministry of Defense as well as the present labor 
market situation, job opportunities for employees who will 
become excess as a result of the closure of the APS sites 
will be very limited and consequently lead to high 
termination costs. 
 
Although it may be expected that the APS activities at 
Brunssum and Vriezenveen will be discontinued in the long 
term, you are requested to include the possibility of keeping 
the sites operational for a few years in your decision making 
process in connection with rebuilding the APS site at 
Livorno, Italy and the sites to be built in Eastern Europe. 
Furthermore I have been informed that both sites are already 
included in the planning for 2004. 
 
We have learned from CEGE sources that operational 
maintenance of materiel returning from the Balkan area and 
Iraq will produce a workload for the Brunssum and Vriezenveen 
sites in 2004 and possibly in the years thereafter.  Also, 
work that is presently contracted to commercial companies 
could provide work.  It is noted that these tasks could be 
performed by the APS sites at a much lower cost.  You are 
requested to include these terms in your considerations as 
well. 
 
It is important to end the uncertainity for the employees and 
to provide clarity if and when subject sites will be closed, 
soon.  Also, possible alternative duties as well as the 
duration of this workload should be looked at and made known. 
 We prefer a transition period of three years, in which a 
decision with regard to the future should be made after two 
years.  During this period the regular workforce could be 
decreased while necessary maintenance capacity could be kept 
on standard with temporary employees.  With regard to the 
reduction in force of actual redundant employees additional 
measures in relation to the Wainwright-Volkers agreement 
should be considered. 
 
If work of a temporary nature (temporary APS, operational 
maintenance, or any other work of temporary nature) would 
only become available for either one of subject sites, we 
prefer to keep the Vriezenveen site open as the job 
opportunities for the Brunssum workforce are better.  The 
AFNORTH organization has shown an interest in utilizing the 
Brunssum site, including a part of the workforce.  Besides, 
the projected expansion of the Eygelshoven APS would create 
job opportunities for excess employees of the Brunssum site. 
 
Signed A. van der List Major General, Director for Personnel 
and Organisation Royal Netherlands Army.  END TEXT 
 
SOBEL