This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, E AND EB 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/13 
TAGS: ECON PREL ETRD IZ KIPR TU EINV
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR-ZIYAL MEETING ON IRAQ, REGIONAL ISSUES, 
AND EPC 
 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman for reasons 1.5 
(B) and (D). 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) At their November 13 meeting, MFA Undersecretary Ugur 
Ziyal told the Ambassador that the GOT wanted to engage the 
USG on regional issues, particularly Iraq.  Ziyal maintained 
that the USG and Turkey shared a common interest in restoring 
stability in Iraq, and suggested a "structured dialogue" to 
enable the GOT to play a helpful role.  On Cyprus, Ziyal said 
the GOT was working toward a solution, but needs the support 
of the USG and others.  He also voiced concern about 
instability in the Caucasus.  The Ambassador responded that, 
in addition to Ziyal's visit to Washington in December, the 
Prime Minister's possible visit to Washington and the NATO 
Summit offered opportunities to broaden our dialogue on 
regional issues.  He briefed Ziyal on a recent skirmish 
between PKK/Kadek and a U.S.-Iraqi border patrol.  The 
Ambassador also raised the importance of making progress on 
problems facing U.S. companies at the Economic Partnership 
Commission meeting in December.  End Summary. 
 
 
MFA Asks for Engagement on Iraq and Other Regional Issues 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Ziyal told the Ambassador he would seek meetings in 
Washington on Iraq, the Caucasus, Afghanistan and other 
regional issues in conjunction with his travel for the 
Economic Partnership Commission meeting on December 2 and 3. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Raising continuing instability in Iraq, Ziyal 
criticized the Iraqi Governing Council as fragmented and 
ineffective.  With the troop deployment issue resolved, 
Turkey would like to help in the political and economic 
process of restoring stability.  In particular, the Turkish 
experience in countering PKK terrorism could be useful to the 
CPA in its effort to combat terror in Iraq.  The GOT is 
following developments in northern Iraq closely, but it is 
also deeply interested in stabilization of the whole of the 
country.  Ziyal maintained that U.S. success in Iraq would 
also be a success for Turkey.  He urged that the USG engage 
in a more structured dialogue with Turkey on Iraq. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Ziyal noted that Jalal Talabani, visiting Turkey next 
week as head of the Iraqi Governing Council, will be received 
by the Prime Minister and the Acting Foreign Minister.  Ziyal 
stated that the GOT would like to encourage Talabani to play 
a positive role in Iraq. 
 
 
¶6. (C) The Ambassador briefed Ziyal on the November 8 
skirmish between a joint U.S.-Iraqi border patrol and the 
PKK/Kadek, and on the USG's determination to prevent the PKK 
from holding a press conference in Iraq.  He also raised the 
upcoming visit of PRM A/S Dewey to Turkey on the Makhmur camp 
issue, urging MFA to include the TGS, Interior Ministry and 
Jandarma in discussions with USG and UNHCR representatives. 
 
 
¶7. (C) On Cyprus, Ziyal said the GOT was working toward a 
solution, but it needs the help of the USG, EU and the 
Greeks.  He opined that a coalition government was likely to 
take power after the elections in northern Cyprus.  Ziyal 
also voiced concern about instability in the Caucasus 
following elections in Georgia and Armenia. 
 
 
¶8. (C) The Ambassador responded that a possible visit for the 
Prime Minister to Washington, and the NATO Summit in 2004 
could provide opportunities to broaden our dialogue and 
achieve results on regional issues.  Expressing appreciation 
for Turkey's leadership of the ISAF, the Ambassador suggested 
that the GOT continue to focus on cooperation with the USG 
and other NATO allies in Afghanistan. 
 
 
¶9. (C) The Ambassador also raised Turkey's relationship with 
the EU, and maintained that the USG would continue to support 
Turkey's desire to start accession talks.  Ziyal responded 
that, if the EU does not offer Turkey a date for negotiations 
next year, this would deal a severe blow to the country's 
European orientation and would strengthen the position of 
those seeking non-Western models for Turkey. 
 
 
Economic Partnership Commission (EPC) 
------------------------------------- 
¶10. (SBU) The Ambassador told Ziyal that we view progress on 
investment issues as the key to a successful EPC meeting, and 
to Turkey's efforts attract badly-needed foreign direct 
investment.  The Ambassador passed Ziyal a list of business 
issues facing U.S. companies, drawing particular attention to 
intellectual property problems in the pharmaceutical sector 
and to the possibility that Turkey could be elevated in the 
Special 301 Watch Lists in 2004 if it did not take action on 
this.  Ziyal agreed on the importance of resolving at least 
some of these issues.  He also said he would like to overcome 
the opposition of Turkey's textile lobby and move forward on 
securing Qualifying Industrial Zones for Turkey.  However, 
Ziyal did not lay out his goals for the meeting, 
acknowledging that he had not yet been well-briefed. 
 
 
¶11. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN