This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 001518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/BCLTV; USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/23/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM BM NLD
SUBJECT: SPDC LIFTS HOUSE ARREST RESTRICTIONS FOR FIVE NLD 
LEADERS 
 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  On November 23 and 24, the SPDC lifted house 
arrest restrictions imposed upon five senior NLD leaders. 
NLD members welcome the news that five of the "Uncles" have 
been released; however, the party's four core leaders, 
including ASSK, remain under SPDC-imposed isolation.  The 
Department should welcome the lifting of restrictions for the 
five CEC members, but continue to insist on full freedom for 
remaining NLD leaders, the release of detained party members, 
and the release of all political prisoners.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On November 23 and 24, Burma's military regime, the 
SPDC, quietly lifted house arrest restrictions on five 
members of the NLD's Central Executive Committee (CEC). 
Authorities had placed the five leaders -- U Nyunt Wei, U 
Than Tun, U Hla Pe, U Soe Myint, and U Lun Tun -- under house 
arrest in the aftermath of the May 30 assault on Aung San Suu 
Kyi (ASSK) and her NLD convoy.  Remaining CEC members ASSK 
(General Secretary), U Lwin (Spokesman), and U Aung Swe 
(Chairman) continue to be held under house arrest while NLD 
Vice Chairman, and CEC member, U Tin Oo remains imprisoned in 
a Sagaing Division jail. 
 
¶3. (C) Three of the "released" CEC members -- U Than Tun, U 
Nyunt Wei, and U Hla Pe -- met together on November 24 to 
take stock of recent developments and to consider next steps 
for the NLD.  According to the three, SPDC Brigadier General 
Than Tun, head of the regime's military intelligence 
political department, visited each of the NLD leaders' homes 
on November 23 to inform them individually that all 
"security" restrictions had been lifted.  The NLD's U Than 
Tun pressed Brigadier General Than Tun on the release of 
remaining CEC members and was told to "be patient."  However, 
the general apparently intimated that he had forgotten about 
U Lun Tun, who was subsequently released on November 24. 
 
¶4. (C) The SPDC informed the released CEC members that they 
are free to associate and engage in political activities, but 
that NLD offices will remain shuttered.  U Than Tun told us 
that his house will serve as de facto party headquarters for 
the foreseeable future.  The CEC's immediate objectives, 
according to the freed leaders, include seeking the release 
of remaining CEC members and pursuing plans to reopen NLD 
offices. 
 
¶5. (C) On November 24, we stopped by U Nyunt Wei's house for 
a visit.  Family members told us he was out enjoying his new 
found freedom and we saw no signs of military intelligence or 
police surveillance at his compound, unlike our attempted 
visit on November 3 when MI thugs blocked our path and 
forcibly pushed U Nyunt Wei back behind his gate.  We also 
met on November 24 with second tier NLD leaders who had 
secretly convened a rump NLD leadership council just one week 
 
SIPDIS 
ago to consider next steps for the party.  However, with news 
that senior NLD leaders are back on the active roster, the 
mid-level members have mutually agreed to back down and 
"await instructions" from the party hierarchy. 
 
¶6. (C) Comment: Freedom for half of the NLD's senior 
leadership is welcome news.  However, the party's four core 
leaders remain under SPDC-imposed isolation.  Post recommends 
that the Department welcome the lifting of restrictions for 
the five CEC members, but continue to insist on full freedom 
for remaining NLD leaders, the release of NLD members 
detained in connection to the May 30 attack, and the release 
of all political prisoners.  End comment. 
Martinez