This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071400Z Jul 03C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 004246 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/07/2008 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU
SUBJECT: EDUCATION MINISTER BLAMES NSC FOR CIRCULAR ON 
ARMENIAN "GENOCIDE" 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 4196 
 
 
Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Education Minister Celik asserted to us July 3 that 
the National Security Council (NSC) is  responsible for a 
circular urging all fifth- and seventh-graders to write an 
essay arguing that allegations that the Ottomans committed 
genocide against Armenians are "baseless."  The circular was 
issued in April under Celik's signature (reftel).  "This is 
what the NSC (under military pressure) wanted,"  Celik said. 
Celik further lamented the fact that the circular was issued 
to Turkey's Armenian schools, and that it directed students 
toward a pre-determined conclusion. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Comment: We did not have the opportunity to press 
Celik further on this issue.  Clearly, there is an element of 
blame-shifting at work.  Celik has in the past reflected a 
narrow view on some hot-button ethnic issues: for example, he 
once explained to Embassy officers that Kurdish "really isn't 
a language" (a claim vigorously disputed by Kurds in 
attendance).  Nevertheless, he has been a consistent critic 
of the Educational Establishment, and the NSC's dominant role 
in appointing members of the Supreme Education Board (YOK), 
which is charged with maintaining the Establishment view in 
educational and related issues.  Indeed, education has long 
been considered to be within the purview of a Turkish State 
that traditionally has abided by an expansive view of 
"national security" -- one that goes far beyond traditional 
security/foreign policy issues.  In this context, his 
comments tend to bolster widespread suspicions (reported 
reftel) that the NSC is working behind the scenes to raise 
the profile of controversial issues like the genocide 
allegations, foment a nationalist backlash and thereby slow 
the reform process. 
PEARSON