This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/SA, DS/DSS/ITA AND SA/INS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 1.6 X1, X6 
TAGS: ASEC PTER CASC CE
SUBJECT: COLOMBO EAC MEETING June 25, 2003 
 
REF: State 176812 
 
(U) Classified by S.V. Wright, Regional Security Officer, 
reason 1.5(C) and (D). 
 
¶1.   (SBU) On June 25, 2003 Colombo Emergency Action 
  Committee (EAC) met to consider our local security posture 
  during upcoming July 4 events.  Charge' chaired the EAC. 
 
¶2.   (C) The EAC agreed that Colombo is not at a high state 
  of risk.  Most local attention continues to be directed 
  toward GSL/LTTE friction following the recent sinking of an 
  LTTE resupply ship off Sri Lanka's northeast coast, and 
  continued killings of LTTE opponents by apparent LTTE 
  "pistol group" assassins. The EAC also weighed potential 
  risks from internal groups, and concluded there is no 
  indication that either the LTTE or the JVP has adopted the 
  US as a target.  The EAC members looked at Colombo as a 
  potential "soft target" for terrorist groups from other 
  countries and all agreed that there was no evidence that Al- 
  Qaida or similar groups were present in or posed a threat in 
  Colombo at this time.  All agreed that they did not perceive 
  any increased risk as we approach planned July 4 events. 
 
¶3.   (C)  Four official and unofficial events are planned: 
 
-    The official Vin d'honneur at the COMR with invited 
  official guests will be held mid-day July 3.  The guest list 
  has been vetted and RSO will arrange additional police 
  presence for security and traffic control.  Local Guard and 
  Surveillance Detection assets will also be enhanced.  COMR 
  compound access procedures will include visual 
  identification of guests by FSN and security staff. 
 
-    During the afternoon of July 4, Consular Chief will 
  hold a representational event at his residence with 30 
  invited consular officers from other missions in Colombo. 
  RSO will provide a local guard during the event. 
 
-    A late afternoon/early evening barbecue will be held at 
  the MSG BEQ on July 4.  RSO will arrange for limited 
  additional police presence in the neighborhood, and 
  increased local guard and surveillance detection assets. 
 
-    Also during the evening of July 4, AmCham will host an 
  event for all Americans at the Taj Samudra Hotel on Galle 
  Rd.  RSO is coordinating with AmCham to ensure any requests 
  for additional GSL security support are being taken 
  seriously by the Sri Lanka Police, Directorate of Internal 
  Intelligence (DII) and hotel staff. 
 
¶4.   (SBU) The EAC considered reissuing our in-country 
  Consular Notice to all Americans.  The committee determined 
  that it is still current and thus no alteration of the 
  notice was needed at this time, and decided not to issue any 
  additional notice unless the Department made a worldwide 
  announcement. 
 
¶5.   (U) The EAC will reconvene as events warrant. 
 
 CAMP