This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  VATICAN 003436 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT. FOR EUR/WE (MENNUTI); EAP/K 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM EAID EAGR ETRD KN VT
SUBJECT:  Caritas on North Korea:  Unified, Willing to 
"Fight to the Last Drop" of Blood, But Still Hungry 
 
REF: 02 VATICAN 3637 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (u) Catholic Church relief network Caritas works with 
the people of North Korea to combat poverty and 
malnutrition.  Post recently met with Kathi Zellweger, who 
oversees Caritas' operations in North Korea and who spends 
considerable time there, to review developments in that 
country.  Zellweger reported that: (1) the firmly unified 
North Korean populace shows no indication of challenging 
its government; (2) the people believe attack by the United 
States is imminent and unavoidable; (3) the government is 
increasingly willing to experiment with capitalism; and (4) 
food availability in the DPRK has increased but is 
irregular.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
North Koreans "will fight to the last drop" of blood 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  (u) "Unity is high," Zellweger said, and North Koreans 
"will fight to the last drop" of blood for their nation. 
The Chong-il regime will continue for many more years, she 
believes, even as it sacrifices millions of lives through 
poverty, malnutrition, and repression.  Communist 
indoctrination in North Korea has been exhaustive.  With 
most North Koreans having grown up under Communism and 
without exposure to any other way of life (even cut off 
from Western television), the relatively high levels of 
education and literacy have failed to generate any youth 
movements for change. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
North Koreans Believe U.S. Attack Imminent 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (u) Based on their reading of U.S. involvement in Iraq, 
as presented by state news agencies, the people of the DPRK 
are convinced, according to Zellweger, that attack by the 
United States is imminent.  The invasion of Iraq even after 
inspectors were admitted, the "dubious" justifications for 
that war, and the classification of North Korea as a member 
of the "axis of evil" have made many North Koreans believe 
they are next in line for American-imposed regime change. 
The people of North Korea feel doomed, Zellweger added. 
The commitment to fight against any aggressor has been 
fueled by DPRK indoctrination, starvation, poverty, and an 
unprecedented sense of unity. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Special Economic Zones and Capitalism 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (u) Although North Korea has established a special 
economic zone in the northeast region of Rajin-Sonbong to 
develop trade relations with Russia, Japan, and China, 
Zellweger believes this has largely failed.  Business 
leaders from China, the most promising trade partner, avoid 
the inconvenient and uncomfortable trip into the region. 
As a result, the North Koreans are hoping that a planned 
second special region closer to the border with China and 
along the train route to Beijing will have more success. 
While it expounds communist theory, the DPRK regime is 
increasingly willing to experiment with limited and 
controlled elements of a market system.  Twelve months ago, 
prices were set for certain goods and services previously 
provided by the State.  Zellweger has noticed that the 
expanded use of a monetary system to pay for goods and 
services (as opposed to government handouts) has given rise 
to a more price-conscious public.  She hears complaints 
that goods are overpriced and unaffordable.  She said that 
with the movement towards some basic market mechanisms, the 
people appear increasingly interested in planning and 
dreaming of a better future that could even include 
tourism. 
 
------------- 
Hunger Update 
------------- 
 
5.(u) In this fiftieth year of the divided Korean 
peninsula, circumstances in North Korea remain grim, 
Zellweger said.  Although food availability has increased 
and acute malnutrition has decreased since the crest of the 
crisis in 1995-1997, North Korea is still heavily dependent 
on international food aid.  The recent WFP announcement of 
 
 
food aid cuts to North Korea will affect some three million 
of the country's current 6.4 million beneficiaries.  The 
most pressing humanitarian problem is the shortage of food. 
Cereals, pulses, soymilk, sugar, and cooking oil are 
desperately needed before the year is up.  Contributing to 
the problem is the lag time between donation and delivery. 
Food donations typically take six months to reach 
recipients, Zellweger pointed out. 
 
---------------------- 
Caritas in North Korea 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  (u) Caritas is permitted extended visits to North Korea 
and relatively unrestricted contact with the people.  It 
has regular access to 162 of North Korea's 260 counties, 
encompassing 85 percent of the DPRK's population. 
Zellweger has documented living conditions during many of 
her visits to the country.  The films have been edited into 
a six-and-a-half-minute video.  Zellweger agreed to provide 
a copy to Post. 
 
7.(u) Caritas works in North Korea to increase the 
number of people fed, maximize the nutritional value of 
food provided, and realize their "helping people to help 
themselves" principle.  To these ends, Caritas has 
developed two new initiatives: (1) fish farming and fish 
egg distribution and (2) sweet potato harvesting and 
nutritional fortification.  Both plans, as well as Caritas' 
seed distribution program, aim to cultivate self- 
sufficiency and combat starvation. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
8.(sbu) Zellweger is a significant source of information 
on North Korea, as her access allows for a rare view into 
o 
conditions throughout the DPRK.  Zellweger's main message 
for the USG is to "send more food."  Zellweger seems 
relatively optimistic that economic engagement will 
contribute significantly to North Korea in time opening up 
to the West as well as helping to achieve better living 
conditions for its longsuffering people. End comment. 
 
Nicholson 
NNNN 
 

 2003VATICA03436 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED