This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 002289 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN, AND WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/25/2013 
TAGS: SNAR PGOV KCRM KJUS PHUM ECON HO
SUBJECT: COWABUNGA:  TWO SEPARATE DRUG SEIZURES YIELD 13 
KILOS OF HEROIN AND APPROXIMATELY 1,026 KILOS OF COCAINE 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 1497 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  On September 24, in two separate actions, 
Honduran police seized 13 kilos of heroin and approximately 
1,026 kilos of cocaine.  In both operations, Honduran 
authorities displayed unprecedented cooperation and 
coordination, working closely together and with U.S. 
counterdrug assets and State Department INL officials at 
Post.  Already, Honduras has confiscated more cocaine this 
year (4,748 kilos) than in the last five years combined.  The 
heroin seizure is the first significant heroin bust in the 
country's history.  The Maduro administration's determination 
to combat drug traffickers can now be accurately 
characterized as a confirmed fact, as well as the Honduran 
military's committed participation for drug-interdiction 
operations.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (C) The September 24 seizure of 13 kilos of heroin, with a 
U.S. street value of some USD 5 million, is the first 
significant heroine bust in Honduran history.  The operation 
was a success due to highly coordinated cooperation between 
the INL-sponsored vetted unit and the Honduran Frontier 
Police.  The vetted unit, having received intelligence that 
the heroin was being transported in a van, located the 
vehicle and then called in the Frontier Police to make the 
arrest. 
 
¶3. (U) Along with the heroin, two suspects were apprehended: 
Jose Antonio Fajardo Enamorado of Honduras (46); and Mauricio 
Castillo Romero from Guatemala (24).  The two men were 
arrested in the Department of El Paraiso, shortly after 
driving across the border from Nicaragua.  According to press 
reports and Honduran authorities, both suspects were to be 
paid USD 6,000 per kilo for transporting the drugs.  The 
heroin originated from Colombia, and Honduran authorities 
believe the drugs were connected to the same cartel 
associated with convicted PARLACEN Congressman Cesar Diaz 
(reftel).  Diaz is currently serving a ten-year prison 
sentence in Nicaragua on narcotics trafficking charges. 
 
¶4. (C) Separately, on the same day, Honduran authorities 
seized approximately 1,026 kilos of cocaine after a go-fast 
boat (originally tracked by SOUTHCOM's TAT assets) beached 
off Punto Gordo, on the north side of the Island of Roatan. 
The craft became tangled in mangroves after attempting to 
evade a Honduran Air Force helicopter that had been deployed 
to track it. The go-fast crew of five fled into the forest, 
abandoning its cargo.  This latest confiscation brings the 
total amount of cocaine seized this year in Honduras to 4,748 
kilos, more than the last five years combined. 
 
¶5. (U)  The U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Harriet Lane, which had 
earlier that day assisted in the seizure of another go-fast 
with traces of cocaine, guarded the craft until Honduran 
authorities arrived on the scene. 
 
¶6. (U) COMMENT:  The cooperation between the U.S., the 
Honduran military, and the Honduran police is clear evidence 
that the Maduro administration is strongly committed to 
combating drug trafficking, directing its institutions to act 
accordingly.  This cooperation represents a giant leap 
forward in Honduran determination to effectively interdict 
drugs transiting the country. END COMMENT. 
Palmer