This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001085 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN AND EB 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
LA PAZ - PLEASE PASS USAID FOR TODD SLOAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID PREL SOCI PINR HO
SUBJECT:  CHANGING THE POLITICAL PARADIGM-MUNICIPAL 
ASSOCIATION DEFEATS EFFORT TO IMPOSE A PARTISAN DIRECTOR 
 
REF:  Tegucigalpa 558 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  The Honduran Municipal Association (AMHON) 
preserved its political independence and nonpartisan 
character by selecting a municipal development professional 
as Executive Director despite a six month effort by the 
Minister of Government and dark-side members of Congress to 
impose a politically beholden Nationalist party member as 
Executive Director.  This come-from-behind victory for the 
maturing municipal government forces, who were aided by the 
USG and other international donors, represents an important 
political counterbalance to the Maduro Administration's now- 
revealed efforts to reap maximum partisan advantage out of 
its political decentralization program.  It is also a huge 
step for the good government and anti-corruption forces 
because the AMHON Board of Directors broke from established 
political tradition, where decisions are made behind closed 
doors based on partisan preferences, by using a professional 
and transparent selection process.  This highly atypical 
selection process for a Honduran institution could serve as 
a model for other entities, furthering the development of 
democracy and decentralization in Honduras.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.  On April 29 the Honduran Municipal Association (AMHON) 
Board of Directors (composed of 12 Nationalist Party Mayors, 
11 Liberal Party Mayors, and one Christian Democrat Mayor,) 
held a regularly scheduled meeting in Tela where they 
selected a new Executive Director, Miguel Angel Munguia, to 
replace the embattled Guadalupe Lopez (reftel).  AMHON 
extended an invitation to international donors to attend the 
meeting as observers in order to continue to provide 
independent guarantees of transparency in the finalization 
of the selection process.  A USAID Municipal Development 
Officer attended, and was accompanied by Alfredo Stein 
(Swedish aid agency) and Jose Antonio Samperi (Spanish aid 
agency). 
 
¶3.  The reasoned debate that transpired during the meeting 
was in stark contrast to previous gatherings during the last 
four months where emotional partisan squabbles dominated the 
discussion.  Particularly disruptive were the previous 
provocations by Nationalist Mayors in AHMON to remove the 
Executive Director (reftel).  It appears that this time, the 
Board's decisions were based on genuine consensus and truly 
reflected the will of the organization as a whole.  (Note: 
Donors' continued interest and follow-up on this issue, not 
to mention their presence during the deliberations, were an 
influence in this outcome.  Ambassador Palmer met on a 
number of occasions separately with the Minister of 
Government and select groups of mayors to help push this 
process to its successful resolution. End Note.) 
 
¶4. Four finalists for the position of Executive Director 
were presented to the Board of Directors for their decision. 
Although AHMON's by-laws state that a simple majority can 
select an Executive Director, the board decided to reach a 
consensus on the new candidate.  (Comment:  Throughout the 
meeting, there were constant mentions of the need for the 
board to get beyond the partisan positions that had been 
dividing them in the past; almost a plea to get back to real 
business.  End Comment.) 
 
¶5. Members of the selection committee reported to the Board 
of Directors on the interviews that were conducted and all 
reaffirmed the transparent and professional nature of the 
selection process, indicating that they learned a great deal 
by going through this process.  Of the four finalists, 
Miguel Angel Munguia was selected by consensus.  Mr. Munguia 
currently works as a regional coordinator for the Honduran 
Foundation for Municipal Development (FUNDEMUN).  Munguia 
has a long history of working with municipalities in 
technical positions and does not have an overt political 
affiliation.  He has a reputation as a solid professional 
and is well known to Post. 
 
¶6. COMMENT:  In a significant setback for Jorge Ramon 
Hernandez Alcerro, the Minister of Government, many of the 
Nationalist Party mayors who had towed the party line in 
previous meetings have now distanced themselves from him and 
the other Nationalist Party members of Congress who sought 
to influence the selection of the new Executive Director. 
In conversations both before and after the meeting, it 
appears a number of Nationalist mayors decided to reject the 
external partisan manipulation that was being applied to 
them.  Further, it appears that this hiring decision could 
prove to be an important moment for AMHON's growing 
political independence in that Nationalist mayors, annoyed 
by continued pressure from their party, are now willing to 
stake out positions that are critical, yet constructive, on 
real issues that are effecting their municipalities. 
¶7. COMMENT CONTINUED:  The transparent selection of a new 
AHMON Executive Director has been a highly atypical process 
for a Honduran institution.  Normally, high-level 
managerial/ministerial positions are essentially chosen 
behind closed doors based on partisan preferences by the 
party holding the majority.  AMHON's example may well serve 
as a model for other Honduran entities to emulate, 
especially in lieu of the relevance AMHON has for the 
further development of democracy and decentralization in 
Honduras.  U.S. mission support from the Ambassador to USAID 
Municipal Development officer provided the critical measure 
of support needed to overcome the intense political pressure 
being exerted by Maduro Administration officials and 
National Congress Members, including the Majority Leader of 
the Congress and Party Whip.  END COMMENT 
 
PALMER