This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 006514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
CAIRO FOR REFCORD 
DEPT FOR PRM/A AND DS/IP/NEA 
DHS FOR BCIS 
ROME FOR DHS DISTRICT DIRECTOR 
ATHENS FOR DHS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PREF
SUBJECT: SECURITY EVALUATION OF REFUGEE PROCESSING SITE 
 
REF: A) CAIRO 3592 B) STATE 202708 C) AMMAN 5629 D) 
     AMMAN 3980 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified - Protect Accordingly 
 
¶1. (U) In a follow-up to a survey conducted and reported in 
reftel D, the Regional Security Office revisited the UNHCR 
interview site to further determine the security suitability 
as an interview site for Iraqi refugees.  This report seeks 
to expand on previously reported security information. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) While the threat environment in Jordan is 
categorized as serious (rated HIGH in all terrorist 
categories), there are no known specific threats (at this 
writing) targeting Americans or American facilities.  Since 
the end of the Iraq war, there has been little street 
reaction to the situation in Iraq or West Bank/Gaza.  The 
recent Israeli air strike into Syria barely registered a 
ripple on the street.  However, the threat environment in 
Jordan requires close attention as past incidents have shown, 
and the Embassy continues to work closely with Jordanian 
security officials and strongly emphasize personal security 
measures.  The latest warden messages in Jordan have been the 
worldwide announcements alerting Americans to be vigilant. 
There are currently no restrictions upon travel to or inside 
Jordan. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The vulnerability of any office located outside the 
Embassy is the lack of set-back from the street.  The 
interview site is located in a five-story residential 
structure with approximately 15 feet of set-back from the 
public street.  It is located near the Embassy (approximately 
3k) in an affluent area of Amman that receives substantial 
coverage by host country security.  The site itself has a 
combination of police and uniformed guards.  Post is unaware 
of any security incidents occurring at this site.  At anytime 
Post personnel are working at this location, Embassy mobile 
patrols will be utilized to further augment the security and 
could respond within minutes of any incident.  Embassy 
Surveillance Detection Units can as well be utilized.  The 
nearest police station is five minutes away, and has 
approximately 100 officers assigned to it.  The RSO will also 
alert host country security when official U.S. presence is 
required at the site, and request additional coverage.  The 
Jordanians in the past have always responded positively to 
these types of requests.  Aside from the lack of set-back, 
this site has no readily apparent security deficiencies.  The 
internal security was covered in reftel D. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Embassy personnel or visiting USG officials can 
easily be equipped with mobile communication to ensure quick 
response if a security situation arose.  All visitors are 
required to receive a threat briefing from the RSO upon 
arrival.  The site can also easily be evaluated just prior to 
the American officer's arrival.  The Embassy has a 24-hour 
Marine Security Guard available to make appropriate security 
notifications for incidents outside the Embassy.  The RSO has 
worked closely with refugee interviewers in the past to 
ensure security coverage at sites where interviews are taking 
place.  RSO staff can also be contacted directly in the event 
of a security incident and can respond within minutes from 
residence or Embassy. 
 
¶4. (SBU) There are no particular travel concerns with routes 
in and around the interview site.  As a precaution, personnel 
are continually urged to vary their times of departure and 
routes taken.  The RSO works very closely with the police and 
hotel security directors to ensure the safety of hotels. 
Hotels are inherently vulnerable and recognized worldwide as 
softer targets.  Therefore the RSO makes every effort to 
elevate the coverage by host country security services at 
places such as hotels, tourist sites, and places of worship. 
 
¶5. (U) If there are any areas not adequately covered in this 
report or reftel D, please contact Regional Security Office 
Amman. 
GNEHM