This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000842 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, DRL, AND DRL/IRF 
 
STATE PASS TO US CIRF 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KIRF VM RELFREE
SUBJECT:  The Prime Minister and Thich Huyen Quang 
 
Ref:  A.  Hanoi 0809     B.  Hanoi 0631  C. Hanoi 175 
 
¶1.  (U)  Vietnamese media, including television on April 2 
and all major newspapers including the Communist Party of 
Vietnam's flagstaff "Nhan Dan" and the military's "Quan Doi 
Nhan Dan" on April 3, gave prominent coverage to an April 2 
meeting between Prime Minister Phan Van Khai and Thich 
("Most Venerable") Huyen Quang, the patriarch of the pre- 
1975 United Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV).  (Note:  The 
UBCV is not recognized by the GVN and several of whose 
leaders -- including Thich Huyen Quang -- have been under 
house/pagoda arrest for many years.  As noted in ref b, 
Thich Huyen Quang was allowed to come to Hanoi in March for 
medical treatment.  End note) 
 
¶2.  (U)  Media coverage of this apparently unprecedented 
senior-level meeting was one-sided.  Thich Huyen Quang was 
not identified apart from his name and religious title; no 
reference was made to the UBCV or any prior or current 
leadership role played by him.  His remarks to the Prime 
Minister were not covered in the media.  Articles claimed 
that he had requested the meeting and the Prime Minister had 
"accepted" the request.  (Note:  According to Thich Huyen 
Quang himself -- ref a -- the Ministry of Public Security 
had "invited" him to remain in Hanoi for a few days because 
a senior leader wished to meet him.  End note) 
 
¶3.  (U)  According to media coverage, the Prime Minister 
described the CPV's and GVN's policy of religious freedom in 
Vietnam and urged Thich Huyen Quang to "participate actively 
in making contributions" toward national development and 
national solidarity. 
 
¶4.  (U)  According to a press release from the International 
Buddhist Information Bureau in Paris (an often harsh critic 
of the SRV), Thich Huyen Quang spoke frankly about 
limitations on religious freedom in Vietnam during his 
meeting with the Prime Minister. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Ambassador Burghardt will be meeting with Thich 
Huyen Quang in a previously scheduled appointment on April 4 
and will have the opportunity to ask more about the 
background to this meeting, its contents, and Thich Huyen 
Quang's assessment of its implications for his own future 
and for the UBCV.. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Comment:  However welcome this meeting and 
surprisingly extensive publicity are, Embassy does not 
believe that this treatment of the Patriarch presages a 
formal recognition of the UBCV or an end to harassment of 
its leaders and followers.  Thich Huyen Quang himself, as of 
April 1, still expected to have to return to his "pagoda 
arrest" in Quang Ngai province shortly.  The meeting may 
nonetheless reflect the GVN's growing recognition that its 
previous more hard-line attitude toward this elderly and 
still respected religious leader had only won the GVN 
decades of bad publicity and years of pressure from the USG 
and other international observers.  GVN leaders may also 
have feared likely international condemnation had Thich 
Huyen Quang died in an isolated pagoda in the country 
without any GVN effort at reconciliation.  The key will be 
to see whether there is any follow-on to what is so far 
pretty much of a one-time phenomenon. 
 
¶7.  (SBU ) Comment, continued:  This attempt by the CPV and 
GVN to appear more positive toward religion in general is 
also in line with the CPV resolution on religion issued at 
the end of the second phase of the 9th CPV's seventh plenum 
in January (ref C).  This resolution, whose full contents 
were released only in March, included many tributes to the 
role of religion (at least for a "small sector" of the 
public) and the right of religious belief (as well as of 
"non-belief"), while nonetheless coming down squarely in 
favor of greater supervision of religious bodies and the 
need for all religious believers to engage only in "legal" 
activities and to conform their international contacts with 
the foreign policy of the CPV and GVN. 
BURGHARDT