This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001699 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER MARR PINR YM MARITIME SECURITY ECON COM
SUBJECT: ADEN GOVERNOR ON DEVELOPMENT, E-LEARNING, THE 
YEMEN COAST GUARD, AND USAID 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Begin summary:  On July 8, Ambassador Hull met with 
newly-appointed governor of Aden, Dr. Yahya Al-Shaibi. 
Ambassador and Governor Shaibi agreed on the importance of 
sustainable development, discussing Aden's status as a World 
Bank Port City, and e-learning.  Ambassador highlighted the 
re-assurance a professional Yemen Coast Guard will provide 
international investors, and discussed possible future 
security training for the Aden airport.  During the one-day 
trip, Ambassador also attended a ROYG graduation for training 
conducted by the U.S. Coast Guard, met with the Director 
General and Deputy DG of Aden Airport, and bid farewell to 
longtime Amideast representative Edward Prados (septel).  The 
Ambassador was accompanied by OMC Chief, Coast Guard 
Representative, Public Affairs Officer, and PolOff 
(notetaker).  Representatives from numerous media outlets 
covered the events (see septel).  End summary. 
 
---------------- 
Governor of Aden 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  During the 7/8 trip to Aden, Ambassador met with the 
new Governor of Aden, and former Minister of Education, Dr. 
Yahya Al-Shaibi (bio note para #7), on an early morning 
flight and again during a formal office call later that day. 
 Governor Shaibi began by joking that he and the Ambassador 
already covered their agendas on the plane and introductions 
were unnecessary, but turned serious, noting the need for 
continued improvement in security, employment, investment, 
restaurants, and tourism in Aden.  Shaibi noted that Aden has 
been selected as a World Bank Port City, and said the initial 
development plan should be ready next year.  He also noted 
that he was visiting the Free Zone later that afternoon (7/8) 
and hoped future development would turn around the 50% plus 
reduction in the number of ships using the port. 
 
---------- 
E-Learning 
---------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  Ambassador congratulated Shaibi on his appointment 
and offered U.S. support for initiatives that strengthen 
Aden, "a window on Yemen for the rest of the world." 
Ambassador announced a $1.5 million E-Learning project that 
will install internet in 20 classrooms across Yemen, 
including 5 in Aden.  He explained that the E-Learning 
program provides not only hardware, but installation and 
training.  The goal, said the Ambassador, with the support of 
ROYG and the business community, is to provide an academic 
resource to link Yemen with the rest of the world.  In 
addition, the local purchase of hardware should produce an 
added economic stimulus.  The governor noted that the 
Ministry of Education (MOE) also has a program by which 
schools can obtain computers directly from MOE and pay only 
3,000 rials ($24USD) a month.  In Aden, Shaibi said he is now 
trying to create an e-government connected to both internal 
and external networks.  He added that this connectivity will 
help with basic information and administration. 
 
----------------- 
Yemen Coast Guard 
----------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  Turning to the graduation ceremony in honor of the 
conclusion of U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) training, Ambassador 
shared the USG observation that the 21 Yemen Coast Guard, 
Navy, and Special Forces officers who completed the training 
were committed to their professions and enthusiastic -- all 
the makings of a "first class operation."  He noted that a 
professionally competent Yemen Coast Guard (YCG) will 
showcase Aden's improved security posture to the world. 
Shaibi added that, in addition to the YCG, ROYG considers 
remote monitoring an important security upgrade for the port. 
 
------------ 
Aden Airport 
------------ 
 
¶5.  (C)  Ambassador briefed Shaibi on a possible visit by a 
USG assessment team during the next six months to look at 
Aden Airport's security posture.  He also mentioned the 
formation of a professional association for graduates of U.S. 
institutions; and highlighted the professionalism, as well as 
additional USG funding, for ROYG's Aden-based Humanitarian 
Demining Program. 
 
----- 
USAID 
----- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Shaibi inquired about the return of AID, noting that 
he was a USAID graduate in 1978 and that the government 
"needed more people with similar backgrounds."  Shaibi said 
the last batch of graduates are currently in high-level 
positions but asked what will happen when they retire. 
 
-------- 
Bio Note 
-------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Bio note - Governor of Aden Yahya al-Shaibi:  Former 
Minister of Education, Dr. Yahya al-Shaibi is a 
U.S.-educated, USAID Graduate (1978) with a PhD in Chemistry. 
 He speaks fluent English, and reportedly visited every state 
in the continental U.S. during his studies in South Carolina. 
 He is currently on leave from his faculty position at the 
University of Sanaa.  End note. 
HULL