This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 004949 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR A/S JONES 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2013 
TAGS: MASS MOPS MARR PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: SAWYERS AND DE MELLO VISIT ANKARA TO CONSULT ON 
IRAQ 
 
(U) Classified by CDA Robert Deutsch, reasons 1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Summary: Outgoing British Iraq Special Envoy Sawyers 
and UN Iraq envoy de Mello visited Ankara July 30-31 and 
August 4 respectively.  Both visitors exchanged assessments 
of Iraq with the GOT and noted the usefulness of a Turkish 
contribution to the stability force without applying pressure 
in that regard.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Departing British Iraq Special Envoy Sawyers visited 
Ankara July 30-31.  According to UK DCM David Fitton, Sawyers 
met with FM Gul, MFA U/S Ziyal, DefMin Gonul, Opposition 
leader Baykal and several AK MPs. Fitton noted the visit was 
primarily a useful exchange of views on Iraq.  Turkish 
officials expressed their concerns about approving the 
deployment of Turkish troops to participate in the Iraq 
stabilization force.  Gul was the most optimistic about a 
potential contribution, while Gonul and Ziyal focused more on 
the difficulties.  The AK parliamentarians noted the uphill 
struggle they faced to approve such a deployment with public 
opinion currently very downbeat on a contribution and the US 
in general.  Sawyers noted Turkish participation would be 
useful and congratulated the GOT on its recently passed 
rehabilitation law aimed at reintegrating PKK/KADEK members 
back into Turkish society.  Fitton said the Turks were "quite 
hopeful" the law would be effective, although, not 
surprisingly, Baykal was skeptical. 
 
 
¶4. (C) MFA Iraq Head of Department Kerim Uras said the 
Turkish interlocutors noted to Sawyers the GOT's concerns 
about the situation in Iraq saying, "you know the issues" 
(i.e. Mahmoud Othman, PKK, the Turkmen, lack of contact with 
the CPA, etc.).  Uras said Sawyers was very blunt and not 
very open to hearing the Turkish views.  In addition, Turkish 
officials believed Sawyers painted an overly rosy picture of 
the situation in Iraq and "his arrogance left a very bad 
taste in our mouths." 
 
 
¶5. (C) Uras said de Mello was in Ankara for a short period of 
time, coming from and returning to Baghdad on the same day. 
He met only with FM Gul and had a working lunch and dinner 
with Turkish officials.  Uras said de Mello came with no 
particular message, but like Sawyers, was merely here to 
exchange views on and assessments of Iraq.  De Mello 
expressed frustration at the low level of cooperation with 
the UN on Iraq, noting that better cooperation would be good 
for the security situation.  De Mello also noted a Turkish 
contribution to the stability force would be useful, but 
acknowledged there were risks involved for Turkish soldiers. 
He doubted another UN resolution would be possible under the 
current circumstances.  De Mello was pleased with the 
humanitarian aid coming from Turkey and congratulated the GOT 
on the August 1 passage of a law that allows a "more 
official" WFP office to open in Turkey that will serve as a 
hub for food aid to Iraq.  De Mello also told the Turks that 
US forces had discovered and confiscated a large amount of 
weapons at UNHCR's Mahmur Refugee camp, near the Turkish 
border.  He suggested a joint plan by the US, TU, UNHCR and 
his office to implement the rehabilitation law and repatriate 
the PKK/KADEK members, most of whom were non-militant Kurds. 
DEUTSCH