This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221357Z Oct 03UNCLAS AMMAN 006746 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
                        Summary 
 
A lead story in all papers today, October 22, focuses 
on the anticipated Jordanian Cabinet change, noting 
that the King has asked Faisal Fayez, currently the 
Royal Court Minister, to form a new cabinet. The new 
cabinet may be announced on Saturday, October 25, 
after a two-day retreat in Aqaba, which is termed by 
Al-Arab Al-Yawm Arabic daily as "an unprecedented 
method" in the formation of cabinets. Al-Arab Al-Yawm 
exclusively publishes the expected names of ministers 
and portfolios that will be included in the new 
cabinet, citing a high ranking source. Another story 
is on King Abdullah's return after a visit that 
included Singapore, Malaysia, the Sultanate of Oman 
and the United Arab Emirates. 
 
On the Palestinian-Israeli front, frontpage stories 
report that Israeli occupation forces raided Ramallah 
and Al-Bireh yesterday and that Palestinian President 
Arafat appealed to the world to stop this "Israeli 
folly." 
 
Editorial commentaries today, October 22, dominantly 
focus on the upcoming new cabinet, which will include 
young ministers, noting that it is a "prelude to an 
anticipated change." These commentaries crowd out 
commentaries on the United States or Iraq. 
 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "A New, Bloodier Chapter of Aggression" 
 
Commenting on recent Israeli raids on the Gaza Strip, 
center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour 
(10/22) editorializes: "There is no doubt that 
Sharon's government would not have dared to escalate 
the situation on the ground in such a manner had 
Washington not resorted to granting it "the green 
light" as expressed in the three U.S. "vetos" used at 
the UN Security Council over the past few weeks 
against draft resolutions that deal with the 
Palestinian cause and the Arab Israeli conflict." 
 
The paper concludes: "The escalating Israeli 
aggression against the Palestinian people has entered 
a new and more serious stage than ever before. Tel 
Aviv is also getting closer day after day and perhaps 
hour after hour towards implementing its decision to 
expel or isolate or liquidate President Arafat. Hence, 
the danger and alarm bell should be sounded at all 
capitals concerned and at the Arab League headquarters 
and at the UN Security Council and at the United 
Nations. Israel is leading the region towards disaster 
and peace and stability in the region will never see 
the light if Israeli aggression - which is going out 
of control - is not halted and if Israel is not forced 
to comply with the voice of reason, logic, and the 
obligations of the road map." GNEHM