This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 003576 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS IT AVIATION
SUBJECT: ITALIAN REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE TO TRANSPORT AXUM 
OBELISK 
 
¶1. (U) THIS IS AN ACTION REQUEST from Embassy Rome DAO and 
Pol-Mil.  See paras 4 and 5. 
 
¶2. (U) On August 4, Embassy received an Aide Memoire from the 
Italian MFA (informal translation in para 6) asking whether 
the USG would authorize the use of US military aircraft to 
transport an ancient stone obelisk from Rome to Axum, 
Ethiopia at Italy's expense.  Italy and Ethiopia have been 
negotiating the return of the obelisk, which was taken from 
Axum by Italian forces under Mussolini and which we 
understand is of great symbolic political value to Ethiopia, 
for years.  An informal request for assistance was made to 
the US Embassy in Addis Ababa and has now been formally made 
through the MFA in Rome. 
 
¶3. (U) Through previous interagency e-mail communications, it 
is our understanding that before Joint Staff can consider any 
tasking to TRANSCOM, State Department must first evaluate 
whether it is in USG national interest to meet the Italian 
request and then communicate its recommendation via 
inter-agency memorandum to DOD to be reviewed by OSD for 
further action.  We further understand that policy guidelines 
require a determination that commercial transportation (we 
believe this may refer only to US flag carriers) is not 
available to transport the obelisk. 
 
¶4. (U)  ACTION REQUEST FOR STATE.  Embassy Rome requests 
Department guidance on response to Italian request.  We 
recommend that any response provide the Italians with a 
timeline as to when to expect a final USG decision, and that 
it also make clear the requirements and costs that must be 
met, including the following: 
 
-- certification that US commercial transportation is not 
available. 
 
-- ROUGH cost estimate for use of C-17 or C-5 to transport 
the obelisk, which will be pre-cut into three blocks, from 
Rome to Axum, Ethiopia. 
 
-- availability of C-17 or C-5 (either already in-theatre or 
from elsewhere) to transport the obelisk. 
 
-- any additional expenses involved, i.e. site survey of Axum 
airfield, etc. 
 
-- payment mechanism for GOI use of US military aircraft. 
 
-- policy determination that use of USG mil aircraft to 
transport the obelisk is in the US national interest. 
(Embassy Addis Ababa may wish to comment on this point.) 
 
END ACTION REQUEST FOR STATE DEPARTMENT. 
 
¶5. (U) ACTION REQUEST FOR AMC PLANNERS.  The details below 
were provided by DAO Addis Ababa to aid in determining the 
feasibility and cost estimates for moving the obelisk. 
Request AMC provide DAO Rome with feasibility of the mission 
and an estimate of the total costs via separate message.  END 
ACTION REQUEST FOR AMC PLANNERS. 
 
-- Axum airfield is a civil use airfield located at 14'08.56N 
38'46.21E.  Elevation 2123m (6967 ft.), single runway 16/34, 
approaches clear at both ends with obstacle clearance of r/w 
16 of 50:1 and r/2 34 of 34:1.  Runway length 2400m, width 
45m, 60m of load bearing overrun at both ends.  Runway 
strength PCN 50/F/C/X/1 of asphalt and concrete composition. 
Runway is marked but not lighted.  Non DoD-approved NDB 
approach only.  No fuel available.  One firefighting truck 
(CAT 2) available with three personnel available 0400-1500 
UCT daily. 
 
-- Cargo.  The obelisk will be cut into three pieces.  Upper 
piece 7.8 x 1.7 x 2.3m, weight 48 tons.  Middle piece 9.2 x 
1.8 x 2.7m, weight 68 tons.  Lower piece 7.2 x 1.8 x 2.9m, 
weight 86 tons.  Each piece will be loaded onto a flatbed 
truck (dimensions and weight unknown) and driven onto the 
aircraft.  No special ground handling equipment needed at 
destination. 
 
¶6. (U) Unofficial translation of Aide Memoire: 
 
"In fulfillment of the bilateral agreement between Ethiopia 
and Italy, the technical and administrative operations for 
the restitution of the Axum obelisk are making good progress. 
 
 
"Upon request by the Ethiopians and after advanced 
investigations had been carried out, it has been agreed that 
the obelisk be sent by aircraft directly to the Axum airport. 
 Such inspections brought out the possibility to use a 
Lockheed C-5 Galaxy aircraft belonging to the US armed forces 
for the transport from Fiumicino airport to the city of Axum. 
 
"As already notified to the US Ambassador in Addis Ababa, 
Italy wants to check the willingness of the US armed forces 
to authorize the use of the above-mentioned aircraft for such 
transport at the expense of the Italian government. 
 
"The Italian technicians will provide any information 
concerning the obelisk, which in the autumn will be divided 
into three blocks with protecting structure."  End 
translation. 
Sembler 
 
 
NNNN 
	2003ROME03576 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED