This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101722Z Oct 03C O N F I D E N T I A L LAGOS 002100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2008 
TAGS: ECON EPET NI PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: PRIVATE MARKETERS PLAN FUEL IMPORTS 
 
 
REF: A. LAGOS 2090 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1737 
 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON FDAY for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Private marketers are planning to import fuel in the 
coming weeks for retail sales in Nigeria.  Managers at both 
Texaco and Mobil report that making joint purchases of large 
cargoes to reduce unit cost is preferable to smaller 
deliveries.  A Texaco official indicated his company would be 
most comfortable buying with Mobil and Total, but those 
details are still under consideration, and each of the six 
major marketers is capable and willing to import cargo on its 
own (ref A). 
 
 
¶2. (C) A Mobil downstream manager told Econoff on October 10 
that Unipetrol has two cargoes already in port.  It appears 
Unipetrol relied on earlier promises by President Obasanjo's 
Petroleum Products Pricing Regulatory Authority (PPPRA) that 
the downstream sector would be deregulated in October (ref 
B).  It purchased cargo and held to the delivery schedule 
even as the strike was impending.  It is unclear at what 
price Unipetrol will sell this cargo, but the Mobil 
representative signaled his company's intentions by saying to 
Econoff "it is our position that the maximum pump price has 
been lifted." 
 
 
¶3. (C) The Mobil official discounted reports that the 
industry agreed to keep fuel prices at 34 naira in the short 
term (reftels).  Referring to press reports outlining the 
agreement, he said there apparently is "some question as to 
who agreed to what"  late Wednesday night.  He stressed that 
as far as his company is concerned, the downstream sector has 
been deregulated pursuant to PPPRA directives and President 
Obasanjo's comments, including Wednesday night's speech. 
Offering proof of this interpretation, the company manager 
told Econoff that prices in Port Harcourt and Calabar are 
above 34 naira today, and opined that it is only in the 
likely "demonstration zones" of Lagos and possibly Abuja that 
gasoline prices remain at 34 naira. (Note: many stations in 
Lagos are closed; apparently their owners are waiting to see 
how the pricing situation will be resolved.) 
 
 
¶4. (C) Texaco managers were more conciliatory about the 
agreement in conversations with Econoff October 9, saying 
that the Stakeholders Committee agreed that prices would stay 
at 34 naira until private marketers' fuel arrived. 
 
 
¶5. (C) We have been checking periodically with NGO's and the 
presidents of NUPENG and PENGASSAN.  The tension of impeding 
strikes has lifted, and our contacts seem in good humor about 
the state of affairs, but do not all realize how quickly the 
Abuja agreement may be tested by the arrival in the market of 
commercially imported, market price fuel.  PENGASSAN thought 
it would take at least a month for shipments to arrive, by 
which time the Stakeholders' Committee would have a 
deregulation plan all wrapped up.  NUPENG thought commercial 
imports could be here in two weeks, a more realistic 
assessment, but NUPENG also believed that two weeks is enough 
time to sort out deregulation.  None of these contacts seems 
aware of the two Unipetrol ships in harbor, but two cargoes 
(not even two days of normal supply) will not, in our 
opinion, cause waves.  NUPENG's President Akpatason remarked 
to us that many petrol stations have not rolled their prices 
back to 34 naira as they were supposed to.   He did not seem 
quite ready to climb back on his warhorse over it; when asked 
what might be done about it, he seemed to think it would be 
rather difficult to identify the offending owners to berate 
them. 
HINSON-JONES