This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000860 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR ASEC ZI
SUBJECT: AFRICAN PRESIDENTIAL MEDIATION IMPORTANT - BUT NO 
QUICK-FIX 
 
REF: A. HARARE 843 
     ¶B. HARARE 780 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) The presidents of South Africa, Nigeria and Malawi 
attempted to restart talks between the GOZ and MDC in 
separate meetings with both sides in Harare on May 5. 
However, both sides stuck to their original positions - 
Mugabe demanding that the MDC recognize his presidency, and 
the MDC refusing any preconditions to talks - essentially 
precluding the dialogue for now.  While not yet particularly 
fruitful, this effort should not be discounted since it 
signals increasing African frustration with the threat of a 
Zimbabwean meltdown and could produce important pressure on 
the Mugabe regime if it is sustained.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Presidents Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, Bakili Muluzi 
of Malawi and Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria met with President 
Mugabe in Harare on May 5 in a mediation effort to discuss 
the resumption of talks with the MDC.  The delegation also 
met MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai, MDC Secretary General 
Welshman Ncube, MDC Deputy Secretary General Gift 
Chimanikire, and MDC special assistant to the president Gandi 
Mudzingwa in a separate meeting. 
 
Muluzi Sympathetic, Mbeki's Sentiments Improving 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. (C) The delegation met first with Mugabe and later with 
MDC officials.  Mudzingwa reported that both sides 
essentially stuck to their original positions, i.e. Mugabe 
demanded that the MDC drop its court challenge of the March 
2002 presidential election and recognize his legitimacy; and 
the MDC maintained they would do no such thing and would 
enter talks only with no preconditions.  Mudzingwa reported 
that Muluzi was sympathetic to the MDC's position that they 
had a constitutional right to bring a dispute to court. 
While Mbeki spoke in very roundabout terms, he ultimately 
seemed frustrated and acknowledged that the essential crisis 
was of governance and nothing else.  Mudzingwa noted that 
Mbeki seemed more sympathetic to the MDC than on previous 
occasions and could possibly be convinced further. 
 
De Facto Recognition? 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Ncube explained the rationale behind the MDC's court 
challenge, as a constitutional right, as a matter of 
principle, and as a bargaining chip.  Ncube also acknowledged 
that Mugabe was the de facto president, that he was sworn-in, 
and was performing the functions of president, but that the 
MDC had the right to challenge his de jure credentials. 
Mbeki seized on this as a potential MDC "recognition" or 
"acknowledgment" of Mugabe's presidency, but the MDC 
officials were loathe to have these statements construed as 
recognition of Mugabe's presidency.  They strongly disagree 
with any preconditions to resuming talks, do not want to 
engage in any capitulation, and believe that Mugabe's demand 
is a smokescreen designed to obstruct talks and in the end 
ensure his and his party's political future rather than a 
resolution to Zimbabwe's political crisis.  The MDC officials 
feel strongly about the principles they stand for and are not 
willing to jeopardize those, and potentially Zimbabwe's 
future, by rushing into talks with Mugabe, who they perceive 
to be insincere.  The MDC officials believe the political 
tide is turning in their direction and they have no reason to 
capitulate now. 
 
¶5. (U) Upon departure, President Obasanjo gave the press an 
artfully constructed formulation about mutual recognition 
that the election was conducted according to the 
constitution.  Government media claimed that the MDC had 
recognized Mugabe's legitimacy.  We do not yet have an inside 
GOZ read on the talks. 
 
Tsvangirai to Go to Malawi 
 
SIPDIS 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) As a follow-up, Muluzi has invited Tsvangirai to 
Blantyre for further consultations.  According to Mudzingwa, 
even though Tsvangirai's passport was confiscated pending the 
outcome of the treason trial against him, Mugabe has agreed 
to allow Tsvangirai to travel to Malawi for this purpose. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
¶7. (C) Two successful stayaways in as many months, and two 
March by-election wins have bolstered the MDC's confidence 
that the political tide is moving in their direction.  The 
same stayaways, as well as African leaders' increasing 
frustration with Zimbabwe's economic crisis and political 
violence appear to be putting succession strategizing near 
the forefront of Mugabe's thinking.  Unfortunately, neither 
side has yet been willing to make any significant concessions 
to ensure that talks begin.  Mugabe in particular seems 
unwilling to publicly admit recent political setbacks, and 
the MDC correctly feels it would gain no advantage by 
capitulating to Mugabe's preconditions (especially with 
another mass action of indefinite duration to begin May 13). 
While not yet particularly fruitful, this effort should not 
be discounted since it signals increasing African frustration 
with the threat of a Zimbabwean meltdown and could produce 
important pressure on the Mugabe regime if it is sustained. 
End Comment. 
SULLIVAN