This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 000635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PREL BM NLD ASSK
SUBJECT: NLD, GOVERNMENT SUPPORTERS CLASH IN NORTHERN BURMA 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The military junta may be preparing a new 
crackdown on Aung San Suu Kyi and the National League for 
Democracy.  At a news conference May 31, the government 
accused the NLD of provoking a riot in Sagaing Division 
northwest of Mandalay that left four dead and more than 50 
injured. It also closed NLD headquarters and placed members 
of the NLD's Central Executive Committee under house arrest 
in Rangoon.  Aung San Suu Kyi herself, and senior members of 
her traveling party, have been held in Ye Oo in Sagaing 
Division, ostensibly for their own safety. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) At a press conference held May 31, the SPDC accused 
the NLD of provoking a riot on May 30 in Depeyin in Sagaing 
Division northwest of Mandalay.  According to the government, 
Aung San Suu Kyi's traveling party was met by a crowd of 
about 5,000 anti-NLD protesters as it reached Depeyin.  An 
argument broke out which degenerated into about a riot, 
leaving four dead and more than 50 wounded.  According to 
news reports (which we have not been able to confirm), Aung 
San Suu Kyi's car was also hit by gunfire.  She was not hurt, 
but was taken, together with 19 members of her traveling 
party, to Ye Oo in Sagaing Division (also northwest of 
Mandalay), where she was held, ostensibly for her own safety. 
In Rangoon, NLD headquarters was closed and members of the 
NLD's Central Executive Committee were placed under house 
arrest. Burmese police special branch members told Poloff on 
May 31 that both NLD spokesman U  Lwin and CEC member U Nyunt 
Wei have been detained under section 10(B) of Burma's Public 
Security Act, which allows the government to detain 
'subversive elements" for up to one year without a trial. 
Most likely, all other members of the NLD's Central Executive 
Committee have also been placed under house arrest. 
 
¶3. (U) Earlier in the day, the government's official 
newspaper, the Myanmar Alin carried stories on its front and 
back pages which accused the NLD of provoking disturbances in 
Chaung U and Mon Ywa in Burma's Sagaing division.  According 
to the newspaper, in Ye Bo San village and Mon Ywa, ASSK's 
party, reportedly about 150 people traveling in 16 cars and 
70 motorcycles, ended up in an altercation with "peaceful 
protesters" that left several injured and resulted in both 
sides filing charges at local police station.  According to 
the government, this followed clashes earlier in the month in 
Kachin State and Mandalay Division between NLD supporters and 
protesters. 
 
¶4. (U) As yet, the NLD has not yet been able to provide its 
version of these latest events.  Earlier in the week, 
however, the NLD's U Lwin had described the clashes in Kachin 
State and Mandalay Division as having been provoked by regime 
supporters, who physically threatened Aung San Suu Kyi and 
her party. 
 
Comment 
 
¶5. (C) We do not have the full story yet on the events in 
Sagaing, but this may be the beginning of a new government 
crackdown on the NLD.  There have been rumors in Rangoon for 
several days that June was to be the month in which the 
government brought the NLD to heel. The events in Sagaing may 
be the start of that campaign. End Comment. 
Martinez