This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001581 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/16/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR KDEM GT
SUBJECT: BERGER SELECTS EDUARDO STEIN AS VP CANDIDATE 
 
 
Classified By: Acting PolCouns Rob Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The front-running Gran Alianza Nacional 
(GANA) officially nominated former Foreign Minister and chief 
of two OAS missions to Peru, Eduardo Stein, as its Vice 
Presidential candidate.  The move, announced on June 16, 
broadens the appeal of the Berger ticket providing it with 
needed policy credentials.  It is also generating optimism in 
civil society and human rights groups that progress on 
corruption and rule of law issues may be possible under a 
Berger government.  Several members of the Unionista party 
have already joined the GANA as a direct result.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Berger camp had been courting Stein with 
increasing openness for several weeks.  For his part, Stein 
maintained in public that he would only join the Berger 
ticket if he was assured of an important role in policy 
decisions and of Berger's commitment to fighting corruption 
and advancing rule of law and social issues.  Stein's 
presence on the ticket provides a solid base of credibility 
and experience for countering Berger's substantive weakness 
and appears to be attracting others to the Berger camp. 
 
¶3. (C) For example, sources close to center-left 
Congresswoman Nineth Montengro report she is agonizing over 
her public promise to remain with the ANN party, when she 
would have far more influence as part of the GANA.  In 
another example, Frank LaRue of the human rights group CALDH, 
told the Ambassador that he was rethinking his avoidance of 
electoral politics given the stakes in this election and the 
possible progress that could be made by working directly with 
Stein as part of a future government.  LaRue said that, if 
the opportunity arose, he would be willing to exchange his 
position in CALDH for one in the government where he could 
make structural changes to the Justice system and seriously 
pursue CICIACS, a yet-to-be-established investigative body 
that will target clandestine groups involved in organized 
crime. 
 
¶4. (U) Stein's nomination led to announcements that former 
Vice President Luis Flores, Gustavo Porras, and Congresswoman 
Olga Camey, all from the Unionista party had also joined the 
GANA. 
 
¶5. (U) In accepting the VP slot, Stein made clear he is 
dropping his bid for the OAS Secretary General position. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶5. (C) Stein is well known to the Embassy and to many in 
Washington for his service as Foreign Minister in the Arzu 
Government and for heading OAS electoral missions to Peru in 
200 and 2001.  He has terrific intellectual and diplomatic 
skills and is a person of rock solid integrity.  His 
nomination thus shores up a critical weakness in the Berger 
campaign and can be expected to generate further interest in 
and momentum for the GANA coalition from groups beyond its 
traditional backers in the private sector.  We expect other 
high profile politicians and opinion makers will now 
seriously consider getting behind GANA in an effort to build 
a coalition capable of defeating the ruling FRG. 
HAMILTON