This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001774 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT BLACK AND NEA DIBBLE, DOJ FOR DAAG 
BRUCE SWARTZ, NSC FOR TOWNSEND 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2013 
TAGS: ASEC KJUS PGOV PTER MARR PARM PREL GM YM COUNTER TERRORISM TERFIN
SUBJECT: INITIAL YEMENI REACTION QUIET REGARDING MOAYED 
EXTRADITION DECISION 
 
REF: A. SANAA 1586 
 
     ¶B. SANAA 1752 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary and Comment:  Neither Post nor the German 
Embassy in Sana'a have yet received any direct reaction from 
the ROYG or the public to the German court ruling in favor of 
granting the U.S. request to extradite al-Moayed and his 
companion.  Press reports 24 hours after the decision remain 
non-inflammatory;  however, many opposition papers are not 
yet published.  The ROYG appears to be encouraging a low-key 
immediate reaction.  This is evidenced in part by the 
official statement coming from Berlin and not Sana'a and the 
emphasis placed on the expected appeals process.  Foreign 
Minister Qirbi's demarche (ref B) reflects a serious concern 
by the ROYG about managing the issue.  The ROYG wants to 
avoid harming U.S.-Yemeni counterterrorism cooperation and to 
protect Americans and Germans in Yemen from any violent 
reaction by showing that the government is working hard on 
the issue.  Post will continue to monitor the official and 
unofficial reaction, particularly as it affects security (see 
warden message issued 7/21 in paragraph 8).  End Summary and 
Comment. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Reaction Towards German and American Embassies 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  (U)  Post's Public Diplomacy section has received no 
press queries as of July 22.  Neither the German Embassy or 
Post has received any new petitions or letters.  ROYG 
officials have not brought up the issue since July 19 
(reftels). 
 
¶3.  (C)  German Poloff told Pol/E Deputy July 22 that German 
officials have instituted extra security measures, including 
the use of armored vehicles at all times.  Post will continue 
to monitor the situation closely and implement appropriate 
security adjustments accordingly. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
ROYG Statement; Official Media Reaction 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  Most official reports featured a press statement 
issued by the Yemeni Embassy in Berlin.  As reported in the 
press, the statement reiterated "ROYG's firm stand" on 
pursuing resolution to the case and confirmed that "the two 
mentioned Yemeni citizens were lured from Yemen to Germany in 
violation of international laws and against Yemeni 
sovereignty."  It added that the Yemeni authorities would 
follow up the case and make "all the efforts" to succeed in 
the appeal.  It ended with a line about having confidence in 
the continuation of Yemen-German relations. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Official daily al-Thawra issued the press statement 
on its front page July 22.  Yemen television news on July 21 
did not lead with the story, instead reporting it in a 
straightforward manner towards the end of the newscast and 
emphasizing the expected appeals process. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Other Media Reaction;  Islah Party 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  Islah party affiliated Sahwa-net July 22 published 
the Yemeni Embassy's statement from Berlin and reported that 
Hamoud al-Darihi, member of the Islah Supreme Authority and 
Chairman of the Follow-up Committee on the al-Moayed case, 
expressed "his astonishment" about the German court decision. 
 Al-Darihi said his committee has been in touch with the 
Yemeni Ambassador to Germany and al-Moayed's lawyer and 
confirmed that they will appeal to the German higher court. 
Al-Darihi also disclosed that a Yemeni parliament and Shura 
Council delegation will be leaving for Germany next Wednesday 
to "continue convincing the German government to return 
al-Moayed and his companion to Yemen." 
 
¶7.  (U)  Independent al-Ayyam also did a straightforward 
report on the decision, the travel of the parliamentary and 
Shura Council delegation and al-Darihi's remarks. 
 
-------------- 
Warden Message 
-------------- 
¶8.  (U)  Text of Warden Message: 
The Embassy of the United States wants to inform American 
citizens in Yemen that the German authorities have ruled in 
favor of the U.S. request to extradite Yemeni Sheik Mohamed 
Ali Hassan Al-Moyyad.  Sheik Al-Moyyad was provisionally 
arrested by the German authorities on U.S. criminal charges 
of providing material support to foreign terrorist 
organizations.  Sheik Al-Moyyad has the right to appeal this 
decision and it is fully expected that he will do so. 
 
In light of this judgment and the expected appeals process, 
American citizens in Yemen are reminded to pay particular 
attention to their personal security at all times.  Americans 
should make it a point to keep a low profile, vary routes and 
times of travel, avoid large crowds and demonstrations and 
report any suspicious activity to the Embassy's Regional 
Security Office at 303-156/7/8/9. 
 
End Text of Warden Message. 
HULL