This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

200407Z Nov 03UNCLAS COLOMBO 002003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO OES/EP, SA/INS, SA/RA, USAID FOR 
BERNADETTE BUNDY - ANE/SA; TREASURY FOR KATIE BERG AND ROY 
ADKINS; USTR FOR AUSTR WILLS; COMMERCE FOR ARIADNE BENAISSA 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ETRD EFIN EAID PREL CE
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S COURTESY CALL ON ENVIRONMENT MINISTER 
RUKMAN SENANAYAKE 
 
 
¶1. (U) This telegram is sensitive but unclassified, please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: During his initial courtesy call with 
Environment and Natural Resources Minister Senanayake on 
November 18, the Ambassador discussed the Tropical Forest 
Conservation Act initiative and potential environmental 
issues related to US Trade Promotion Authority.  Senanayake 
was enthusiastic about TFCA and indicated the GSL is 
preparing enabling legislation.  He admitted to problems 
with certain NGOs, but was optimistic about getting 
eventual agreement.  Senanayake used the discussion on 
trade-related environmental issues to express GSL 
appreciation for USAID efforts to implement air quality 
improvement measures, particularly emission standards and 
testing.  End Summary 
 
TFCA 
---- 
¶3. (U) Ambassador paid an initial courtesy call on Minister 
for Environment and Natural Resources Rukman Senanayake on 
November 18.  The Ambassador noted his recent conversations 
in Washington on the Tropical Forest Conservation Act 
(TFCA) initiative.  The US is ready to move forward with 
this initiative. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Senanayake was enthusiastic about TFCA but 
frustrated with the criticisms being voiced by certain 
segments of the NGO community.  He complained that certain 
Sri Lankan NGOs lacked technical capacity and were 
primarily politically motivated.  Ambassador suggested that 
he and Senanayake jointly host a meeting with NGO reps and 
other stakeholders to respond to concerns.  Senanayake 
agreed and noted that upcoming public discussions on the 
enabling legislation would provide a good backdrop for such 
a meeting.  (Note: The legislation is currently with the 
GSL's legal draftsmen.  Once completed, it will come to the 
Ministry and the Minister will host a public meeting to 
answer questions and get input.  After that, the bill would 
be submitted to the cabinet committee, followed by a 
consultative committee of parliament, before being 
submitted to parliament for final consideration. End Note.) 
 
Potential FTA Negotiations 
-------------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) The Ambassador then noted that the Environment 
Ministry would likely play a key role in any potential 
negotiation of an FTA and explained the environmental 
portions of US Trade Promotion Authority.  Senanayake 
acknowledged the importance of a potential FTA and said his 
ministry was working to improve enforcement of 
environmental standards.  Senanayake said that Sri Lankans 
were environmentally conscious.  While some countries might 
find value in lowering environmental standards for 
industrial gain, such a move would not be acceptable in Sri 
Lanka. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In this vein, Senanayake noted USAID assistance in 
the area of air quality improvement, particularly with 
regard to vehicle emissions and testing.  USAID-sponsored 
experts and projects have played a significant role on 
reducing emissions and have been instrumental in framing 
appropriate policy responses to the problem.  He indicated 
the ministry's goal was to improve enforcement, but to 
operate initially through a cooperative process aimed at 
ensuring widespread public exposure to new environmental 
rules. 
 
LUNSTEAD