This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN, PM, EB, OES, AND L 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PBTS PREL PGOV MOPS ECON EFIS PINR HO
SUBJECT: ONGOING MARITIME DISPUTE BETWEEN HONDURAS AND 
NICARAGUA MAY BE ON THE PATH TO RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 652 
     ¶B. TEGUCIGALPA 606 
 
¶1. (U) Nicaraguan and Honduran military authorities recently 
deemed ongoing territorial disputes between the two nations 
in the process of resolution, according to press reports. 
Nicaraguan GEN Javier Carrion articulated his commitment to 
resolving maritime disputes peacefully, as well as to 
fostering a constructive means of communicating disagreements 
between both countries.  In response, head of the Honduran 
armed forces, GEN Jose Barahona, affirmed that relations have 
improved in the region, due in part to the recent commitment 
of Central American countries to resolving maritime and land 
disputes through instruments of international mediation. 
 
¶2.  (U) The maritime disagreement between both countries 
stems from controversy over competing claims to maritime 
territory and their exclusive economic zones in the 
countries' Pacific and Caribbean coasts.  One flash point is 
fishing rights.  Nicaragua has alleged that Hondurans have 
been illegally fishing in the Gulf of Fonseca, whose waters 
are shared by Nicaragua, Honduras and El Salvador. 
Diplomatic tensions came to a head in November 1999 when 
Honduras signed an agreement with Colombia in the Caribbean 
which Nicaraguan authorities claimed led to the usurping of 
130,000 square km of Nicaraguan maritime territory.  In 
response, Nicaragua imposed a 35 percent tariff on 
Honduran-made products and sued Honduras in the International 
Court of Justice.  Nicaragua finally revoked its retaliatory 
tariff on Honduran products in March of this year. 
 
¶3.  (U) General Carrion recently announced that Nicaragua 
would await the International Court of Justice's decision on 
the Caribbean maritime border dispute, expected in 2004. 
Likewise, General Barahona articulated his support for the 
process and his hope that international mediation would 
foster closer relations between the Central American 
countries. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Comment:  The good news here is that there is an 
obvious channel of communication between the two military 
chiefs.  However, many members of the Honduran armed forces 
remain deeply suspicious of Nicaraguan intentions.  In 
addition, GEN Carrion's public commentary also highlights the 
need for a clearer delineation of maritime borders in the 
Gulf of Fonseca through the use of buoys.  Despite his 
positive stance, GEN Carrion warned that Honduran and El 
Salvadoran fishermen who crossed illegally into Nicaraguan 
waters would be detained.  Honduran officials tell EmbOffs 
that this is exactly the kind of Nicaraguan enforcement 
action in the gulf that normally exacerbates tensions.  End 
Comment. 
Palmer