This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 000806 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR KU
SUBJECT: KUWAIT AIRPORT PLANS TO MAINTAIN CIVILIAN FLIGHTS 
 
¶1. SUMMARY. Kuwait's Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCI) announced that Kuwait International Airport does not 
intend to close operations in face of a potential war in Iraq 
unless military action jeopardizes the safety of civilian 
flights.  Commercial airlines, however, may decide 
individually to stop flights into the country.  So far, most 
airlines continue to fly regular schedules, although some 
carriers have limited the number of routes into and out of 
Kuwait at least through the end of March.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. On March 5, Fawaz Al-Farah, Deputy Director General for 
Aviation Safety and Air Transport at DGCI, told EconOff that 
all efforts will be made to keep Kuwait International Airport 
open.  Al-Farah confirmed and expanded on a report that 
appeared earlier that day in Al-Qabas Arabic-language 
newspaper, which claimed that an agreement had been struck 
between Kuwait's Ministry of Defense and DGCI to coordinate 
flight paths for civilian and military aircraft during any 
armed conflict. 
 
¶3. Al-Farah said that as part of the GOK's Emergency 
Contingency Plan -- drafted last month by the Ministry of 
Defense in consultation with the US Military -- the airport 
would only close should it be determined that military action 
placed civilian flights at risk.  At that time a decision 
would be made by DGCI to either partially or fully close 
civilian flight operations until it was deemed safe to reopen 
them. 
 
¶4. Al-Farah said that the airport has stepped up security 
measures in the last few weeks.  Airport security officers 
have been given instructions and training on how to respond 
to a variety of emergencies.  Gas masks have been issued to 
key staff members, and all employees have been forbidden from 
taking vacations at this time to ensure adequate personnel is 
available in case of emergency. 
 
¶5. Most airlines continue to operate at full or slightly 
reduced schedules, Al-Farah said.  KLM and Lufthansa told 
Post separately that they are operating at full capacity, 
while Kuwait Airways has reduced some of its flights to North 
America, Europe, and the Middle East.   British Airways has 
gone from one flight a day to four flights a week at least 
through the end of March.  Al-Farah said BA's decision was 
partly due to lower air traffic from London to Kuwait, as 
many British citizens have already left the country, while 
those staying have greatly limited their air travel.  (Note: 
Air China has decided to stop all flights into Kuwait at 
least through the end of March, but this action should not 
have much effect on American travelers. End Note.) 
 
¶6. COMMENT: Post plans to pass the above information to 
American citizens in Kuwait through its warden system in an 
effort to dispel rumors that Kuwait Airport intends to close. 
JONES