This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 002260 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
ATHENS FOR TSAR MONTGOMERY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR MOPS JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN ISSUES MODIFIED NOTAM 
 
REF: STATE 86416 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU) After receiving REFTEL talking points April 8, 
Jordan Civil Aviation Authority Director Hanna Najjar told us 
that he had "no problem" issuing a Notice to Airmen (NOTAM), 
but said he would limit the contents to operational 
instructions, ICAO provisions, frequencies, etc., removing 
allusions to the U.S. and coalition military forces. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Najjar stressed other measures that the CAA was 
already taking, such as denial of entry into Jordanian 
airspace to aircraft without a flight plan and prior notice 
of entry.  He added that the CAA mandates radio and radar 
contact 10 minutes prior to entry into airspace; failure to 
do so insures a military escort. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The following is the modified NOTAM, issued April 
10, by the CAA, available on the Defense Internet NOTAM 
System (DINS) at www.notams.faa.gov: 
 
Advisory for All Aircraft Entering Jordanian Airspace 
 
This notice is effective immediately and will remain in 
effect until further notice. 
 
¶A.  All aircraft should be positively identified by radar and 
two way communication before entering Jordanian airspace. 
 
¶B.  The timely and accurate identification of civil aircraft 
operating within Jordanian airspace is essential to preclude 
the inadvertent use of military force against civil aircraft. 
 
¶C.  All civil aircraft flying within or entering the 
Jordanian airspace shall continuously monitor one or both 
international emergency frequencies (VHF 121.5 MHz and/or UHF 
243.0 MHz). 
 
¶D.  When an aircraft carries a serviceable transponder, the 
pilot shall operate the transponder at all times during the 
flight regardless of whether the aircraft is within or 
outside airspace where SSR is used for ATS purposes.  All 
crews are reminded to continuously operate the SSR 
transponder in accordance with the ICAO provisions (PANS-ATM 
- Chapter 8, PANS-OPS, Vol. i, Part viii, and ICAO 7030 
Chapter 8). 
 
¶E.  When an aircraft carries serviceable weather radar the 
pilot shall operate it at all times during the flight within 
the Jordanian airspace regardless of weather conditions. 
 
¶F.  The pilot should ensure continuous display of aircraft 
exterior and cabin lighting and illumination of logo lights, 
if possible. 
 
 
GNEHM