This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/14/2013 
TAGS: CY GR IZ PREL TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR MILLER MEETS WITH TURKISH MFA U/S ZIYAL 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman, E.O. 12958, 
reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Ambassador to Greece Thomas Miller met with 
Turkish MFA U/S Ziyal during a one-day trip to Ankara on 
October 10.  Ziyal said his relations with Greek MFA SecGen 
Skopelitis were good and he predicted Turkish-Greek relations 
would improve as Turkey's relations with the EU improved.  On 
Cyprus, Ziyal disagreed with the Annan plan's border and 
bizonality arrangements, worried about future violence 
between Turkish and Greek Cypriots, and criticized SCC 
Weston's remarks about Denktash.  Ziyal emphasized Turkey's 
desire for any Turkish troops sent to Iraq to be seen as 
working with Iraqis and helping humanitarian efforts.  Ziyal 
agreed to explore the possibility of a joint Turkish-Greek 
humanitarian project in Iraq.  Ambassador Miller raised the 
issue of illegal migration from Turkey to Greece; Ziyal 
agreed Turkey needed better border controls.  Ziyal foresaw 
no breakthrough on the Halki Seminary issue.  End Summary. 
 
 
Turkey-Greece Relations 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador Miller said he was glad planned Turkish 
and Greek military exercises on Cyprus were canceled.  Ziyal 
said Turkey needed good relations with Greece, but noted that 
some in Greece continued to try to use relations with Turkey 
for domestic political advantage.  He also admitted that some 
in Turkey have a similar agenda toward Greece.  However, 
Greece had become more confident after entering the EU and 
felt less threatened by Turkey, and Turkey was overcoming its 
insecurities about Greece.  The Cem-Papandreu relationship 
had taken on a life of its own, outlasted Cem, and had enough 
momentum that it could outlast Papandreu. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Ziyal predicted bilateral relations would improve "as 
Turkey's EU vocation becomes clearer."  He was tackling the 
tough issues with Greek MFA SecGen Skopelitis, with whom he 
had developed trust, although no great feelings of warmth. 
Ziyal noted Skopelitis was being transferred to another 
assignment.  He worried about how Greece's April national 
elections would affect bilateral relations but doubted that 
any new Greek government would try to stir up anti-Turkish 
sentiments. 
 
 
Cyprus 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Ziyal said the GOT was committed to reaching a 
comprehensive solution on Cyprus.  He criticized SCC Weston 
for remarks about Denktash.  Ambassador Miller replied that 
Ambassador Weston speaks for the USG on Cyprus and that the 
GOT should heed his message.  The USG would not accept 
Denktash's insistence on a two-state solution. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Ziyal said that the Annan plan's proposed borders 
"would not fly" with the GOT and that there had to be 
stronger bizonality guarantees.  Moreover, any solution 
needed to remove restrictions on travel by Turkish Cypriots 
to the south.  Ziyal said that, in the short term, Greek 
Cypriots traveling to Turkish Cypriot zones would need 
protection.  There had already been some violent incidents, 
he claimed, quelled by police.  Moreover, the potential for 
violence would increase after an agreement because of 
heightened public expectations about the possibility of 
return of former properties.  Widespread violence could wreck 
any agreement. 
 
 
Iraq 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Ziyal said the GOT was being transparent about its 
intentions in sending troops to Iraq: Turkey had a problem on 
its southern border that needed attention.  "We want a normal 
Iraq, that's all," he added.  But if Turkish troops were 
perceived as an occupation force it would be a disaster. 
Turkey would therefore seek to work with Iraqis and would 
emphasize humanitarian projects.  On the timing of troop 
deployment, Ziyal said "the sooner the better." 
 
 
¶7.  (C) Ziyal said tensions between U.S. forces and Iraqis 
would be eased if the U.S. announced a timetable for turnover 
of government functions, even if the timetable later slipped. 
 As it was, the situation in Iraq was "not good." 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Ambassador Miller asked if there were any 
possibilities for joint Turkish-Greek efforts in Iraq, 
perhaps a joint field hospital or other medical endeavor. 
Ziyal responded positively and said he would mention it to FM 
Gul.  (Amb. Miller subsequently relayed this positive GOT 
response to Greek FM Papandreu.) 
 
 
Turkey-Greece Border Issues 
 
 
¶9.  (C) Ambassador Miller pointed out recent incidents along 
the Turkey-Greece border in which over 30 illegal migrants 
had died (24 by drowning and 7 by landmines).  Ziyal admitted 
the GOT recently noted large discrepancies between the number 
of people entering and leaving Turkey.  He said Turkey needed 
better border controls in the east and south and was 
discussing the subject with the EU. 
 
 
Halki Seminary 
 
 
¶10.  Ambassador Miller asked about the GOT's current thinking 
on Halki seminary; some movement on the issue would greatly 
boost Turkish-Greek relations.  Ziyal downplayed any chance 
of a breakthrough, which he said required amending Turkey's 
Constitution by a "weighted majority."  Ziyal doubted 
amendment would be feasible just on the Halki issue; it 
needed to be part of a larger package.  Ziyal said the GOT 
had offered to open Halki as part of a university but the 
church had rejected the idea. 
 
 
¶11.  (U) This message has been cleared by Ambassador Miller. 
 
 
¶12.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN