This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000159 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CORRESPONDENCE FOR THE SECRETARY FROM FOREIGN MINISTER 
GUTIERREZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PBTS GT BZ
SUBJECT: LETTER FROM FOREIGN MINISTER GUTIERREZ TO 
SECRETARY POWELL 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: STATE 3578 
 
¶1. Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez gave us on January 21 a 
letter to Secretary Powell (dated January 17) in which he 
thanks the Secretary for his letter (reftel) congratulating 
Gutierrez on his nomination as Foreign Minister.  In his 
letter, Gutierrez expresses his desire to work together with 
the USG to address shared concerns, and restates the 
Guatemalan Government's interest in resolving its border 
differences with Belize.  An Embassy translation of the text 
follows in paragraph two; the original is being sent by pouch 
to WHA/CEN. 
 
¶2. Begin text: 
Guatemala, January 17, 2003 
 
Most Excellent Mr. Secretary: 
 
It is an honor for me to thank you for your letter of 
congratulation and the remarks you made in it about my 
experience.  I am committed to my country by the confidence 
given me by President Alfonso Portillo in naming me Minister 
of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Guatemala. 
 
I fully agree with your comment that our countries share 
common goals like those listed by you in your letter.  In 
that regard, I want to express to you my determination to 
address these issues, which, in some cases, I believe are 
goals where we have shared responsibility. 
 
I view my responsibility at the head of this Ministry as a 
challenge to find means to confront these shared concerns 
that you mention.  The goals we share in the furtherance of 
our bilateral relations will constitute an important priority 
for me. 
 
In regard to the territorial differences between Guatemala 
and Belize, I want to reiterate to you emphatically that, as 
is outlined in the Third Report of the President to the 
Congress of the Republic, this issue represents "a 
fundamental theme that the Government has sought to resolve 
through peaceful means, through legal action and in accord 
with the stipulations of international law.  The policy of 
the Government has been to actively seek a resolution to the 
border differences that is peaceful, honorable, equitable and 
permanent." 
 
In the same manner, I would like to express my desire that 
the cooperation between our nations be strengthened and 
continue in every field, for the purpose of building a more 
worthy, secure and just world, which is the legitimate 
aspiration of our citizens and all humanity. 
 
Thank you again, and I hope in the near future to be able to 
speak personally with you.  I take advantage of this 
opportunity to express to you my highest esteem and most 
distinguished consideration. 
 
Edgar Gutierrez 
Minister of Foreign Affairs 
(end text) 
 
 
 
 
Hamilton