This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000571 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/21/2010 
TAGS: PTER ASEC CASC YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN: HUNT OIL SHOOTINGS - MARCH 21 UPDATE 
 
REF: SANAA 520 
 
Classified By: DCM: AGMISENHEIMER FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  The U.S. investigative team from Embassy Sanaa is 
continuing to collect evidence regarding the March 18 
shootings of Hunt Oil employees in Marib (reftel and 
previous).  Security circumstances permitting, the team is 
planning an additional visit to Marib in the near future to 
collect additional evidence and attempt to interview 
additonal witnesses. 
 
¶2.  (C) Following is a March 20 report prepared by the team 
on its efforts thus far. 
 
Begin Text: From 18 to 19 Mar 03, an U.S. Embassy Sana,a 
investigative team comprised of FBI and FPD personnel 
traveled to Yemen Hunt Oil Company and the scene of the 18 
Mar 03 shooting at Rig 226, approximately 70 KM East of 
Marib, Yemen. 
 
-     Investigative team conducted preliminary investigative 
activity to ascertain the facts and circumstances surrounding 
the shooting incident, which resulted in the death of one 
U.S. citizen, a Canadian citizen, a Yemeni citizen and the 
critical wounding of another Canadian citizen.  The assailant 
allegedly committed suicide at the scene. 
 
-     On 18 Mar 03, investigative team was met by high 
ranking Yemeni law enforcement and military Marib government 
officials as well as Yemen Hunt Oil Company management 
personnel. 
 
-     Yemeni government and law enforcement personnel 
provided the investigative team with access to witnesses, 
crime scenes and limited access to evidence collected by 
Yemeni investigators.  All investigative activity, to include 
all witness interviews were conducted in the presence of 
large numbers of high ranking Yemeni government officials. 
 
-     Crime scenes included a double trailer/temporary 
building utilized as office space, which was the alleged 
location where three individuals were shot and an outside 
scene, where allegedly another individual was shot and where 
the shooter allegedly committed suicide. 
 
-     Investigators were granted access to and examined the 
shooter,s corpse at the Military Hospital in Marib, Yemen. 
A cursory examination of the corpse revealed one gunshot 
wound (entry wound) to the mid section and an apparent 
posterior exit wound.  Additionally, a large abrasion was 
noted on the left rear cranium.   Investigators were granted 
permission to view the clothing worn by the shooter. 
 
-     Information obtained from crime scene searches and 
witness interviews to date disclosed the following: 
 
o     On 18 Mar 03, at approximately 11:45 hrs, a Yemeni 
carpenter employee of Nabors Drilling International Limited, 
allegedly shot two Canadians, a U.S. citizen and a Yemeni 
national, then allegedly shot and killed himself 
o     One of the Canadian victims survived the shooting and 
is currently being treated for gunshot wounds to abdomen. 
o     With the exception of the U.S. citizen, who was 
employed by Yemen Hunt Oil Company, all others involved in 
the incident were Nabors employees. 
o     Currently motivation of the shooter is unknown. 
Investigation is ongoing.     End text. 
 
 
HULL