This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 002316 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO NEA FOR DIBBLE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL YM IZ
SUBJECT: INCREASING YEMENI SUPPORT FOR IRAQI GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: A. SANAA 2187 
     ¶B. FBIS RESTON - 031907Z SEP 03 
     ¶C. SANAA 1818 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for reasons 1.5 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (c) On September 15, the DCM discussed Iraq and other 
issues with Ministry of Foreign Affairs Under Secretary 
Hussein Taher bin Yahia, who said that the ROYG would welcome 
a visit by the Iraqi Governing Council (IGC) "with open 
arms,"  and that plans for such travel would most likely be 
arranged through Yemen's mission in Baghdad.  The DCM 
commended Yemen's support of the Iraqi delegation at the Arab 
League ministerial in Cairo, September 12-14. 
 
¶2. (c) Pol/Econ Chief and Pol/Econoff met with Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Director of the Americas Office Abdulsalem 
Qassim al-Awadhi on September 9 to deliver several unrelated 
demarches (septels).  During the meeting, al-Awadhi previewed 
that the ROYG was joining other Arab countries in support for 
allowing IGC a seat at the table for the Arab League meeting 
of foreign ministers.  He noted that the main purpose of the 
recent visit of Syrian Vice President Khaddam was to discuss 
Iraq.  Note: This is in contrast to press reports and a 
Syrian diplomat in Sanaa who claimed the main purpose of the 
visit was bilateral relations.  End note.  When asked about 
whether the IGC would visit Yemen, al-Awadhi said that the 
ROYG is prepared to welcome the Council and there has been 
some speculation that the IGC will visit Yemen and other 
countries after the Arab League meeting, but no firm plans 
have been discussed. 
 
¶3. (u) Background:  On or about August 28, the ROYG announced 
that it would recognize the Iraqi cabinet.  Several days 
later the Yemen Government officially welcomed the formation 
of an Iraqi government under U.S. civilian supervision (ref 
b).  Local press reports that in a recent satellite 
television interview Foreign Minister Qirbi reaffirmed the 
ROYG position that U.S. and British forces should withdraw 
from Iraq and said that the Arab League and the UN should 
provide the groundwork for any new Iraqi constitution.  End 
background. 
 
¶3. (c) Comment:  Yahia's and al-Awahdi's seemingly 
enthusiastic support for a visit by the IGC is a welcome 
development, but it does not appear that the government is 
extending an invitation to the Council so much as expecting 
that it will include Yemen in any as-yet-unannounced official 
travel plans (ref a).  End comment. 
HULL