This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 05 BRUSSELS 005635 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/ERA MICHAEL DIXON, AND H; H PLEASE PASS TO 
HIRC HILLEL WEINBERG AND FRANK RECORD, AND TO CHRIS 
CONNELLY, CHIEF OF STAFF OF CONG. JO ANN DAVIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL EUN USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: TRANSATLANTIC LEGISLATORS' DIALOGUE MEETING 
 
REF: A. A) BRUSSELS 5520 
 
     ¶B. B) BRUSSELS 3619 
 
Classified By: USEU POLOFF TODD HUIZINGA, FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The biannual Transatlantic Legislators' 
Dialogue (TLD) meetings were held in Williamsburg, Virginia 
on November 13-16 (list of participants in paras 20-21).  The 
six members of Congress and ten members of the European 
Parliament (MEP's) reviewed the draft EU Constitutional 
Treaty, and held a broad discussion on current political a 
security issues where US and European views frequently 
conflict, including Iran, Iraq, the Middle East, the war on 
terror, and Guantanamo.  The TLD also offered opportunities 
to increase engagement with the European Parliament (EP) on 
important issues to the USG where the EP plays an important 
role, such as USG access to Passenger Name Record (PNR) data, 
EU chemicals policy, and international corporate governance. 
The next TLD meeting is tentatively scheduled for the spring 
in Dublin.    End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Draft EU Constitutional Treaty 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) The discussion centered around a debate among the 
MEPs on whether a draft constitutional treaty would transfer 
sovereignty from the EU member states to the Union to a 
significant degree, and whether such a development would be a 
positive one.  Swedish Conservative MEP Charlotte 
Cederschioeld averred that the EU was based on pooling the 
sovereignty of the member states, and that the constitutional 
treaty's purpose was to make the EU more transparent, 
efficient and democratic.  UK Conservative Philip Charles 
Bradbourn countered that the constitutional treaty proposed a 
massive transfer of power to the EU at the expense of the 
member states.  He deplored, for example, the fact that the 
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights had been incorporated into 
the draft treaty as justiciable, whereas originally it had 
been only declaratory.  UK Conservative Caroline Jackson 
stressed that the treaty did not represent "a Philadelphia 
moment."  She said "it's not a constitution, it's a 
constitutional treaty...and it's a dreadful mess."  UK 
Liberal-Democrat Sarah Ludford, in contrast, lauded the 
constitutional treaty as an attempt to consolidate all the 
previous EU treaties into one document and set explicit 
limits on the power of the EU, preventing Brussels "mission 
creep" at the expense of the national capitals.  Rep. J. 
Randy Forbes asserted that, if history were a guide, the 
constitutional treaty, once passed, would become a 
constitution.  He, along with Rep. Darrell Issa, wondered 
whether EU member states were fully prepared for the possible 
ramifications of a constitutional treaty. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶3. (SBU) MEP Bastiaan Belder (Dutch Calvinist Party) stressed 
the EU's desire to work constructively with the U.S. on Iraq 
reconstruction and reiterated the EU position that 
sovereignty, and in the shorter term key aspects of 
sovereignty such as certain policing and military tasks, be 
given to the Iraqis themselves as soon as possible.  Rep. 
Phil English replied that, as a representative of a 
congressional district with many Iraq expatriates, he 
understood the need to encourage a speedy transition to 
independence for Iraq.  English added that the West needed to 
give Iraq the investment it desperately needs, to emphasize 
grants rather than loans for reconstruction aid, and to help 
Iraq become a model of democracy in a battered region. 
 
---- 
Iran 
---- 
 
¶4. (U) Belder laid out the EP view that the EU should develop 
closer trade and economic ties with Iran only if Iran made 
visible progress on respect for human rights, cooperation 
with non-proliferation regimes, stopping support for 
terrorism and not undercutting the Middle East peace process. 
 He stressed EP support for U.S.-EU cooperation on Iran, 
especially in the areas of non-proliferation and Iranian IAEA 
obligations, and in pressing Iran to cut off its support to 
Hamas and Hizbollah. 
 
------------------------- 
Middle East Peace Process 
------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Cautioning that he had voted against it because of 
what he saw as its anti-Israeli slant, Belder reviewed the 
October 9 EP resolution on "Peace and Dignity in the Middle 
East."  The resolution affirms that implementation of the 
roadmap is the solution to the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. 
It stresses that Palestinian terror is unacceptable, but also 
condemns pre-emptive attacks by Israel and resulting civilian 
casualties, as well as the Israeli security fence.  Belder 
stressed that in his view the resolution did not give enough 
weight to the destabilizing influence of neighboring 
countries, especially Iran and Syria.  In this regard, Belder 
decried the expected completion of the European Commission's 
association agreement with Syria (ref A) as a false signal 
that would encourage Syria to expect no negative fallout if 
it continues destabilizing activities such as support for 
Hezbollah.  He lamented that the EU had not sufficiently 
pressured the Palestinian Authority (PA) to make internal 
reforms, and that Arafat was still in control of the PA 
security services.  Belder noted that an EP working group on 
possible misuse of EU aid funds to the PA was due to deliver 
a final report on its investigation soon. 
--------------------------------------------- - 
War on Terrorism, Guantanamo, anti-Americanism 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. (SBU) After Belder's comments the discussion centered on 
cultural issues related to the war on terrorism, such as 
European attitudes towards the U.S., the root causes of 
terrorism and European views of U.S. policy towards the 
Guantanamo detainees.  MEP Ludford averred that one must 
attack the "root causes of terrorism as well, such as poverty 
and alienation."  Also, she warned that "competing images of 
the United States" in the world were hindering U.S. 
effectiveness against terror, and that the U.S. had to be 
more careful to promote an image of the U.S. as a beacon of 
democracy and the rule of law.  As an example, Ludford said 
U.S. policy on holding detainees without trial in Guantanamo 
was doing immense damage to the reputation and image of the 
U.S. in Europe.  Ludford raised the October-November 
Eurobarometer poll, "Iraq and Peace in the World," in which 
more respondents (from EU member states) designated Israel as 
a threat to peace in the world than any other country, with 
the U.S., Iran and North Korea tied for second place. 
Ludford said that, while the results should not be taken at 
face value, they were reactions to "particular policies being 
pursued at a particular time." 
 
¶7. (C) U.S. TLD Chair Rep. Jo Ann Davis responded that she 
had been to Guantanamo and could testify that the detainees 
were being treated well with full respect for their human 
rights.  She said she had seen a BBC documentary on 
Guantanamo on a recent trip to Rome, and was struck by how 
inaccurate it was.  Rep. Issa, who had also visited 
Guantanamo, concurred, saying Bush had boldly stepped into 
unprecedented territory to deal with the unprecedented threat 
of global terror.  Rep. English added that, by any objective 
standard, U.S. policy in Guantanamo met the standards of 
international law and respect for human rights.  Rep. Cliff 
Stearns specified that U.S. actions in Guantanamo, including 
methods of interrogation and possible future military 
tribunals, were in compliance with the Geneva Conventions. 
 
¶8. (C) Rep. English took exception to the idea of "root 
causes of terrorism."  He said that he believed there was a 
cultural division behind Islamist terrorism that was based on 
a strain of Islamic fundamentalism that was anti-Western, 
anti-Israel and anti-capitalist.  This phenomenon had to be 
confronted, and the U.S. and the EU needed to confront it 
together. 
 
------------- 
NATO and ESDP 
------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) MEP Belder and Rep. Davis concurred in their concern 
regarding a possible EU military planning headquarters 
separate from NATO and a mutual defense clause in the draft 
constitutional treaty that could be divisive to the NATO 
alliance.  Rep. Davis said that more NATO capabilities were 
needed, not more structures that would duplicate or compete 
with NATO.  UK Conservative MEP James Elles said that the 
discussion about these issues was fluid, but that U.S. 
concerns were being taken into account.  He opined that, in 
order to avoid an EU caucus within NATO, a strengthened 
U.S.-EU dialogue was needed to discuss issues before they 
reached NATO. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Passenger Name Recognition (PNR) 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) MEP Cederschioeld assured her U.S. counterparts that 
the EP recognized the U.S.'s right to have information about 
people entering its borders, and expressed general optimism 
that a compromise could be reached that solved the remaining 
problems regarding purpose of data collection, data retention 
time and the number of data fields to which the U.S. could 
have access.  Cederschioeld suggested that the U.S. and EU 
should have mutual watch lists and share them with each 
other.  She invited Congress to send members to visit the EP 
Citizens Rights Committee to talk about the issue. 
 
¶11. (C) Rep. John Mica concurred that there had been a 
mellowing on both sides on PNR, and reiterated that the U.S. 
side shared the EU concern about data protection.  He said 
the watch list idea was an important one, and pointed out 
that the U.S. has more than eleven agencies involved in this 
issue and that, despite a statutory requirement, these 
agencies had not yet succeeded in preparing a consolidated 
list.  Mica said that agreed and mutually recognized 
transatlantic standards for security requirements and 
measures were also lacking, and that the standardization of 
passport and travel document information was lagging behind. 
Mica said that the U.S. side might take Cederschioeld up on 
her invitation sometime in the spring, and invited 
Cederschioeld to send him an e-mail detailing EP concerns 
about PNR. 
 
--------------- 
WTO post-Cancun 
--------------- 
 
¶12. (C) UK Labour MEP Arlene McCarthy said a far-reaching 
reform of the WTO was needed in view of the frustrating 
breakdown of talks in Cancun, and announced that the EP had 
asked the European Commission to make proposals on how to go 
about WTO reform.  McCarthy specifically stressed the 
importance of upholding the Doha agreement on access to 
medicines.  Rep. English said the failure of Cancun was a 
result of the tactics of the G-21 countries, whose 
unwillingness to compromise was not shared by the U.S. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Financial Services, Corporate Governance 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (C) UK Labour MEP Peter Skinner said the EU was 
determined that the financial sector be a key factor in the 
development of a transatlantic market.  On the Sarbanes-Oxley 
audit-firm registration issue, Skinner said the EU's 
number-one imperative was still to achieve mutual recognition 
between the PCAOB and competent European authorities, so that 
EU and national laws would be respected.  Skinner said 
congressional pressure on the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) was needed to achieve this.  (Note:  Skinner 
appears to have been kept in the dark by DG Internal Market 
officials who have been discussing this issue with the PCAOB. 
 Internal Market Commissioner Bolkestein reported to member 
state finance ministers in September that a mutual 
recognition agreement was not in the cards.  End note.) 
Skinner also expressed the line of the European stock market 
lobby that SEC failure to grant foreign exchanges 
better-than-national treatment to operate their electronic 
trading terminals in the U.S. under exemption from SEC 
regulation was in fact a protectionist device aimed at 
keeping EU-based exchanges out of U.S. markets.  In order to 
rectify this situation as well, he said, congressional 
pressure on the SEC would have to play a crucial role. 
(Note:  Skinner also met with SEC officials during this 
visit.  End note.) 
 
¶14. (C) Rep. Stearns expressed frustration with the 
difficulty of solving the problem of corporate corruption if 
the perpetrators are sufficiently determined.  Remarking that 
the U.S. approach was law-based and the EU's principle-based, 
he said he was interested in EU views on corporate 
governance.  Skinner decided on that basis that he would 
explore starting a high-level dialogue involving MEPs, 
members of Congress and business leaders, among others, on 
corporate governance and related regulatory issues. 
---- 
GMOs 
---- 
 
¶15. (C) MEP Caroline Jackson said the EU legislation of July 
2003 on tracing and labeling of biotech food and feed was 
necessary, despite its absurdities, because of European 
consumers' concerns.  Rep. Issa replied that he believed that 
the legislation was costly and burdensome, and that, if 
consumers were worried, they could choose themselves whether 
or not to buy GMO products.  Rep. English added that GMO 
technology was very important for the developing world.  He 
said the U.S. was still taken aback about Zambia's having 
rejected U.S. food aid in the summer of 2002, although 
Zambians were facing starvation, because of concerns that 
accepting GMO foods from the U.S. would negatively affect 
trade with the EU.  To Rep. Issa's comment that the EU 
legislation was "unabashed protectionism," Jackson replied 
that it might be more accurate to call it "unabashed 
cowardice." 
 
--------- 
Chemicals 
--------- 
 
¶16. (C) MEP Jackson said that the proposed European 
Commission chemicals regulation -- Registration, Evaluation 
and Authorization of Chemicals (REACH) -- had been "watered 
down" after comments from industry had come in, and there 
would be further analysis of the cost of the proposed 
regulation.  Rep. Stearns greeted that news, and Rep. Davis 
said that, in the event of a new cost analysis, the relevant 
congressional and EP committees should coordinate to ensure 
that there was a mutually understood basis for analyzing the 
costs.  Jackson agreed, and staff on both sides agreed to 
follow up. 
 
---------- 
Open Skies 
---------- 
 
¶17. (C) Dutch Christian-Democrat MEP Peter Pex expressed a 
basically positive outlook on the ongoing U.S.-EU open skies 
negotiations.  However, he lamented U.S. legislation limiting 
the flexibility of U.S. negotiators to move on foreign 
ownership of airlines, and criticized the Fly America policy 
for official USG travel. ("I took a U.S. carrier to come to 
this meeting, because I am a free man!")  Rep. Mica said that 
opening markets was difficult when so many U.S. carriers were 
struggling.  He asserted that some progress had been made on 
legislation on opening up cabotage services in the U.S. to 
European carriers. 
 
---------------------- 
Bilateral Trade Issues 
---------------------- 
 
¶18. (U) Participants discussed mainly FSC and steel, with 
members of Congress exhorting their MEP counterparts to argue 
for patience and moderation in EU retaliation, so as to avoid 
unnecessary escalation of the conflicts.  MEP James Elles 
opined that bilateral trade issues came under the rubric of 
the Transatlantic Market which had been endorsed by the TLD 
in Rome in June (ref B).  The question, said Elles, was how 
to manage the trade disputes over the course of the next 
eighteen months during which there would be elections on both 
sides.  He suggested that the TLD ask for a benefits analysis 
of the Transatlantic Market within the next year, perhaps 
getting endorsement for such an analysis from the next 
U.S.-EU summit. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
U.S. Industry on EU Medical-Device Regs 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶19. (U) Rep. Stearns raised, on behalf of the Advanced 
Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), concerns about a 
draft EU directive up-classifying all shoulder, hip and knee 
joint implants and thereby requiring manufacturers to submit 
to a costly review process by European regulators.  Skinner 
said he would pass on U.S. concerns to appropriate colleagues 
in the EP and the European Commission. 
 
--------------- 
TLD Delegations 
--------------- 
 
¶20. (U) U.S. Members of Congress participating were: 
 
Jo Ann Davis (R, VA) 
Phil English (R, PA) 
¶J. Randy Forbes (R, VA) 
Darrell E. Issa (R, CA) 
John L. Mica (R, FL) 
Cliff Stearns (R, FL) 
 
¶21. (U) MEP's participating were: 
 
James Nicholson (UK, Ulster Unionist) 
Bastiaan Belder (NL, Calvinist Party) 
Charlotte Cederschioeld (SW, Conservative) 
Caroline Jackson, (UK, Conservative) 
Peter Pex (NL, Christian-Democrat) 
James Elles (UK, Conservative) 
Baroness Sarah Ludford (UK, Liberal-Democrat) 
Philip Charles Bradbourn (UK, Conservative) 
Arlene McCarthy (UK, Labour) 
Peter Skinner (UK, Labour) 
 
¶22. (C) Comment:  This TLD was useful in creating 
opportunities for Congress to increase its engagement with 
the EU in areas of particular interest: (1) a possible 
congressional visit to Brussels to discuss PNR; (2) possible 
cooperation on a cost analysis of REACH; (3) targeted 
dialogue on corporate governance and related issues; and (4) 
possible launching of a joint analysis of the benefits of the 
existing transatlantic (U.S.-EU) market.  Post is ready to 
provide support in these and other areas of congressional 
interest.  End Comment. 
 
¶23. (U) This message was not cleared by CODEL members. 
 
FOSTER