This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 006676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/24/2013 
TAGS: KPAL KWBG PREL IS TU
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE:  MESSAGE TO PALESTINIANS 
 
 
REF: STATE 296490 
 
 
(U) Classified by Political Counselor John Kunstadter e.o. 
12958, reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) We presented reftel demarche October 21 to MFA Middle 
East and Maghreb Head of Department Kemal Tuzun.  After 
promising to convey the contents of the demarche to MFA's 
Deputy Undersecretary for the Middle East, Tuzun then 
confirmed by telephone that the MFA would transmit the 
demarche directly to the Turkish consul general in Jerusalem 
to discuss with the Palestinians. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Tuzun noted terrorism has no justification anywhere 
and that Turkey would urge the Palestinians to take the 
necessary steps to control terrorism.  He further commented 
that at the same time, there is an imbalance in the use of 
force by Israelis.  Tuzun suggested unoffically that a third 
party was needed to monitor the progress made by the Israelis 
and Palestinians.  He was concerned the lack of progress in 
accomplishing Road Map objectives would prompt the 
international community to lose interest in the 
Israeli-Palestinian issue. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Finally, Tuzun presented us with a "List of security 
actions taken by the Palestinian security forces:" which 
Nabil Abu Rudeineh delivered to the Turkish consul general in 
Jerusalem "for the consideration of the Americans." 
Emphasizing his role as "only the messenger," Tuzun said the 
Palestinians want to intensify and increase security contacts 
with the Israelis and the Americans and had asked the Turks 
and the members of the Quartet to transmit this message.  We 
reminded Tuzun the demarche asked the Palestinians to unite 
their security forces under the authority of the prime 
minister.  A copy of the list of security actions is being 
sent by facsimile to Assistant Secretary Burns. 
 
 
 
 
EDELMAN