This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T LAGOS 000351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/ITA, DS/IP/AF, DS/ICI/PII 
FBIHQ FOR CTD/WMDOU 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: X1.6 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINS PARM NI
SUBJECT: LOST RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL 
 
 
Classified By: RSO J. Pelphrey.  Reason 1.5 (d) and (g) 
 
 
¶1.  (S)  Summary:  CG, LEGATT, and RSO met with Johan Bakker, 
Vice President of Haliburton Nigeria on 02/18/03.  Mr. Bakker 
advised the CG that a radioactive source used in logging 
operations was missing.  Mr. Bakker advised that the material 
was approximately 18.5 curries in strength and had been 
missing since late November or early December.  Haliburton 
and Chevrontexaco corporate investigators had been conducting 
investigations, but they had not been able to determine who 
took the material, exactly when or where it was taken.  In 
view of the current world situation, Haliburton was notifying 
the Consulate. End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (S)  CG, LEGATT, and RSO met with Johan Bakker, Vice 
President of Haliburton Nigeria concerning missing 
radioactive material.  The material was described as 
approximately four to five inches in length and one to one 
and a half inches in diameter with a strength of 18.5 
curries.  The radioactive material is used in the oil 
industry for logging operations.  The material was placed in 
a "pig", a cylinder approximately eighteen inches in diameter 
and weighing ninety-four kilograms.  The "pig" was then 
placed in a box with radioactive markings on the side. 
 
 
¶3.  (S)  The radioactive material had been used in oilfield 
operations at a  Chevrontexaco site and was supposed to be 
transported back to Haliburton's operational base.  The "pig" 
was stored at Escavros in late November and transported to 
Warri where it was picked up for transshipment to Port 
Harcourt on or about December 4th.  Although it is unclear 
when the material was taken, the driver reportedly claimed to 
a Haliburton investigator that the locks on the box 
containing the "pig" were broken when the box was picked up 
and placed on a flatbed truck for shipment.  No other items 
on the flatbed were taken or disturbed during the trip. 
 
 
¶4.  (S)  The flatbed stopped overnight in a village during 
the transit from Warri to Port Harcourt.  Investigators, who 
have tried to interview local villagers, have been 
unsuccessful.  Initially, Haliburton officials believed the 
material may have been taken for ransom, but no demands have 
been made.  It is also believed that someone who may not know 
what the material is may have thrown it away.  There is 
concern that anyone who handled the material for any length 
of time may have died or is critically ill.  A one meter 
exposure for sixty-eight minutes is considered lethal 
according to Mr. Bakker. 
 
 
¶5.  (S)  Nigerian federal, state, and local authorities have 
been notified of the missing radioactive material and the 
IAEA has been contacted.  Nigerian police are continuing 
their investigation.  Haliburton and Chevrontexaco brought in 
investigators from London who have assisted with their 
continuing investigations as well.  Local populations have 
been offered a fifty thousand Naira (approximately 400 USD) 
reward for information leading to the return of the material. 
 To date, only two attempts have been made to collect the 
reward and neither was considered credible. 
 
 
¶6.  (S)  A report of Haliburton's attempts to recover the 
material along with photos of the neutron pig and shipping 
container has been forwarded to FBIHQ and will be forwarded 
to the Department. 
HINSON-JONES