This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T AMMAN 000252 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2013 
TAGS: PTER SNAR KCRM NO NL JO
SUBJECT: MULLAH KREKAR:  JORDAN UNLIKELY TO BE ABLE TO MEET 
DUTCH REQUESTS FOR MORE EVIDENCE 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 9307 
     ¶B. B) AMMAN 150 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (S)  Charge and PolCouns delivered ref a points January 
13 to Ali al-Ayed, personal assistant to Foreign Minister 
Muasher, and Samer Naber, MFA Legal Advisor.  Charge 
encouraged the GOJ to provide to the Dutch as much as 
possible of the additional evidentiary and legal information 
they have requested, and to continue to consult with the 
Dutch on how to build the strongest possible legal case for 
extradition.  He also offered additional USG assistance if 
the GOJ thought it would be helpful.  The best outcome for 
both Jordan and the U.S., he stressed, would be Krekar's 
extradition to Jordan.  Jordan should do as much as possible 
to achieve that goal.  Even if Jordan is not able to respond 
to all of the GONL's requests for further information, the 
Charge stressed, it should provide at least a partial 
response.  He emphasized that any additional Jordanian 
information would have to be supplied in the next few days to 
be of use in the scheduled January 23 extradition hearing. 
 
¶2.  (S)  Ayed, recalling that the Minister and the Ambassador 
had discussed this a few days ago (ref b), responded that he 
would pass our comments on to FonMin Muasher.  Jordan, he 
continued, had received and studied the December 19, 2002 
Dutch request for further information on the Krekar case. 
However, again citing the Minister's earlier conversation, 
Ayed said he did not believe that the GOJ would be in a 
position to provide to the Dutch "what they want" (i.e. 
additional intelligence evidence on which the narcotics 
charges are based).  He said that FonMin Muasher had conveyed 
this point to Dutch Ambassador Marjanne de Kwaasteniet in 
Amman this week. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  ROAL separately make a parallel presentation to 
the Jordanian General Intelligence Directorate. 
 
BERRY