This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ROME 003794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL RS GM AF EUN
SUBJECT: BERLUSCONI'S END OF SUMMER MEETINGS WITH SCHROEDER 
AND PUTIN; ABU MAZEN VISIT POSTPONED 
 
REF: A) BERLIN 3095 B) STATE 237880 C) STATE 0223920 
 
     D) ROME 3483 E) MOSCOW 12154 
 
Classified By: CHARGE D'AFFAIRS EMIL SKODON.  REASON: 1.5 (B)(D) 
 
 ¶1. (C) Summary:  The agenda for PM Berlusconi's August 22/23 
meeting with German Chancellor Schroeder will include the 
Intergovernmental Conference and transatlantic relations.  We 
told the PM's acting diplomatic advisor that an excellent 
vehicle for improving US-EU relations would be a commitment 
from Italy and Germany to work together to increase resources 
for Afghanistan.  Berlusconi's meeting with Russian President 
Putin in Sardinia August 29-31 is a warm up for the November 
Russia/EU summit and bilateral state visit.  We recommended 
that Russia's role in settling the Moldova/Transnistria 
conflict, and our concern over continued Russian cooperation 
with Iran's nuclear program be added to the agenda.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------- 
Abu-Mazen Visit off 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) On August 20 diplomatic advisor to PM Berlusconi, 
Francesco Talo (senior advisor in the PM's office during the 
summer break) gave Charge and Poloff an overview of the PM's 
agenda and goals for his upcoming meetings with German 
Chancellor Schroeder and Russian President Putin.  He also 
confirmed media reports that the meeting with PA PM Abu Mazen 
had been postponed due to events in the region.  Talo said 
that while there was no firm date for the rescheduled visit, 
Italy will be the first European country Abu Mazen visits 
when he resumes his international travel. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Dinner, Opera and Breakfast with Schroeder 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) Based on ref a reporting and Talo's comments, it would 
seem that Berlusconi and Schroeder share a common goal for 
the August 22/23 meeting in Verona, which is to repair the 
damage to German-Italian relations caused by Berlusconi's 
comments at the European Parliament in July and Schroeder's 
subsequent cancellation of his vacation in Italy.  Talo said 
that events Friday evening August 22 would be strictly 
private and personal - a dinner followed by the opera Carmen. 
 EU Commission President Prodi will join the two leaders for 
the evening. 
 
¶4. (C) On Saturday morning August 23, Schroeder and 
Berlusconi will have a working breakfast.  Talo described the 
meeting as an "informal, free conversation" but said that the 
conversation would center on two blocks of issues: the EU and 
Italian EU Presidency, particularly the Intergovernmental 
Conference; and transatlantic relations.  The two blocks are 
linked, according to Talo, because how the EU handles 
transatlantic relations is key to the success of its foreign 
policy.  Talo said that it was in Italy's and all EU 
countries' interests to help Germany rebuild relations with 
the US.  "We are all in the same boat, and when one passenger 
misbehaves we all suffer." 
 
¶5. (C) One issue in which Talo saw convergence between the US 
and Germany was Afghan reconstruction and stabilization, 
citing Germany's commitment to the IC's efforts in 
Afghanistan, and its willingness to consider Brahimi's 
request to enhance and strengthen NATO's role and ISAF 
presence.  To Talo's request for suggestions for the 
Schroeder/Berlusconi agenda, Charge emphasized that the US is 
accelerating the push for financial assistance to support the 
government in Kabul (ref b), particularly that related to the 
UN effort to prepare for upcoming elections.  A commitment 
from Italy and Germany to work together bilaterally and 
within the EU to increase financial aid to Afghanistan would 
be an excellent practical step in strengthening transatlantic 
relations (see also septel). 
 
¶6. (C)  Comment:  This meeting is important to Berlusconi's 
efforts to get the focus on the Italian EU Presidency off of 
his Strasbourg gaffe and on to substance.  He is interrupting 
his summer vacation in Sardinia to travel to Verona to meet 
with Schroeder, an indication of the importance he places on 
Germany's role in the success of one of his top priorities 
for the Presidency - the Intergovernmental Conference. 
 
 
Germany has come out strongly in support of signing the 
constitution basically as written by Giscard, and to resist 
the call by some EU members to open items for discussion and 
redraft.  This is key to Berlusconi's goals of finishing the 
IGC during the Italian Presidency and a subsequent "Treaty of 
Rome II" signing ceremony.  He will need Schroeder's help to 
keep the process on track.  End Comment 
 
----------------- 
Putin in Sardinia 
----------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Putin will be Berlusconi's guest at his summer home in 
Sardinia from August 29-31.  Again, Talo emphasized that the 
visit was mostly personal, but it did offer the leaders the 
chance to review issues in a relaxed atmosphere.  Broadly, 
they will follow up on items discussed at their July 29 lunch 
in Moscow, and set the stage for the November 6-7 EU-Russia 
Summit and bilateral state visit in Rome.  Talo said that 
much of the bilateral discussions would center on Russian 
interest in enlarging and enhancing cultural contacts, 
exchange visits and tourism.  That is the public face the 
Italians will give to the visit. 
 
¶8. (C) Privately, said Talo, the leaders would discuss a wide 
range of issues, from the Quartet role in the MEPP to 
enhancing EU/Russian relations.  The Charge noted that it 
would be helpful if two issues of interest to the US and EU 
could be placed on the meeting agenda.  The first would be 
for Berlusconi to underline with Putin the important role 
Russia has to play in accelerating progress on conflict 
resolution and arms withdrawal in Moldova/Transnistria (ref 
c).  Charge also asked Talo' if  Berlusconi could reiterate 
once again with Putin our strong concern over Iran's nuclear 
program, and clarify conflicting reports (refs d and e) on 
the level of Russian cooperation with the construction 
program at the Bushehr facility.  Talo promised to try to 
work the issues into Berlusconi's briefing materials. 
Skodon 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME03794 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL