This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001754 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT 
DEPARTMENT ALSO PASS TOPEC 
NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  10-08-13 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PINS PHUM CE
SUBJECT:  Cohabitation row continues as President blasts 
PM over security 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1642, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission James F. 
Entwistle.  Reasons 1.5 (b, d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  President Kumaratunga has responded to 
a nasty letter sent by Prime Minister Ranil 
Wickremesinghe on September 18.  In the response, the 
President criticizes the PM's record on national 
security and urges him to put the country before his 
desire to remain in power.  The continued critical back- 
and-forth between the two underscores the tense 
cohabitation relationship and may have implications for 
the peace process. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) As previously reported (Reftel), President 
Kumaratunga and Prime Minister Wickremesinghe have 
exchanged several nasty letters regarding the security 
situation around the eastern port city of Trincomalee. 
The latest salvo in this back-and-forth came on October 
6, when the President responded to the PM's letter of 
September 18.  The letter, which is quite lengthy and 
detailed, was reproduced in the press on October 8.  The 
President made the following key points in the letter: 
 
-- The President characterizes the PM's responses to her 
security concerns as "evasive, and attempt to divert 
attention from the very serious threat to national 
security, caused by your acts of omissions and 
commissions of the peace process." 
 
-- Re her track record as Minister of Defense, the 
President refutes the PM's criticism of her tenure, and 
lashes out at the PM, stating that "Your own highly 
personalized version of recent historical events wholly 
belie actual facts." 
 
-- Responding to the PM's allegations that she made 
military decisions on the basis of party politics, the 
President queries the PM as to his meaning, stating "Am 
I to understand that your political ethics and morality 
regarding the national interest means that one must hide 
from the Cabinet of Ministers, the relevant authorities, 
and the people, the true facts about crucial matters of 
state such as the sovereignty and security of the state 
and the safety of our peoples?  If ensuring the latter 
is what you call playing politics, it will be most 
interesting to know what you consider to be 
statesmanship and effective governance." 
 
¶3.  (U) The President goes on to state that, despite his 
assurances, the PM had not taken steps to improve 
preparedness or taken any initiatives to strengthen the 
military.  Further, she criticizes the PM's national 
security strategy, alleging that on the PM's watch, the 
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) had murdered 
Tamil democratic political activists, continued 
recruitment, smuggled in arms, and "completely dominated 
the lives of the community in the entire government 
controlled northern and eastern provinces." 
 
¶4.  (U) In closing the letter, the President urges the 
PM to "attempt seriously, if it is at all possible, to 
put the country before self and the desire to remain in 
power at any cost."  Wrapping up, the President offers 
to advise and give leadership to the PM, "if you are 
willing, even at this late stage, to realize what is 
best by the country and not only for yourself." 
 
------------------------------ 
Cohabitation problems continue 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (C) Mission checked with contacts in the PM's 
office, who reported that the PM had not yet decided 
whether or not to respond to the President's letter. 
Dr. Pakiasothy Saraivanamuttu, the executive director of 
the Center for Policy Alternatives, a local think-tank, 
told poloff on October 8 that the President's criticism 
of the PM was merely her attempt to create a situation 
of "discomfort" with how the PM was handling the 
security situation and the peace process. 
Saraivanamuttu added that he was unconvinced that the 
President would take any dramatic action towards the PM, 
and that if the relationship between the two did not 
improve, there could be an adverse effect on the peace 
process. 
 
¶6.  (C) COMMENT:  Judging from the tone of their 
correspondence, neither cohabitation partner has learned 
to deal civilly with the other.  The implications for 
the sort of political compromise and collegiality that 
may well be required as the peace process moves forward 
are not encouraging.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶7.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD