This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T RANGOON 000838 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL PHUM BM
SUBJECT: ETHNIC LEADERS PLAN APPEAL TO LEADER OF JUNTA 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN MARTINEZ FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
¶1. (S)  Summary: Reverend Saboi Jum, the head of the Kachin 
Baptist Convention, has revealed plans by ethnic leaders to 
appeal directly to the head of the SPDC for a return to the 
path of national reconciliation. Jum asked COM if the release 
of Aung San Suu Kyi alone  would be enough to ease US 
pressure on the junta. COM told Jum that the release of Aung 
San Suu Kyi was important, but not enough to ease USG 
pressure for release of all political prisoners, improved 
human rights for all Burmese, and credible signs of 
commitment to a transition to democracy. Given Jum's 
closeness to the SPDC's Secretary One Khin Nyunt, it was an 
excellent opportunity to reinforce the USG message. End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (S) Reverend Saboi Jum, the head of the Kachin Baptist 
Convention and one of the most respected ethnic leaders in 
Burma met with COM and DCM on July 9.  Jum and his brother, 
Hkun Myat (a businessman) are both very close to the number 
three man in the SPDC, Secretary One, General Khin Nyunt. 
(Note: Jum played a vital part in negotiating the Kachin 
cease-fire agreement, as did Khin Nyunt. Hkun Myat also 
assisted in mediating cease-fire agreements with Karenni, Mon 
and Karen insurgent groups. End Note) 
 
¶3. (S) Jum's stated purpose at the meeting was to reveal 
plans by ethnic leaders to appeal directly to Senior General 
Than Shwe (head of the ruling SPDC junta) for a return to the 
path of national reconciliation.  Jum said that a decision 
was taken by group of ethnic leaders earlier this month to 
draft a letter to Senior General Than Shwe appealing to him 
to allow renewed political activity on the part of the NLD, a 
release of political prisoners, and the release of Aung San 
Suu Kyi. 
 
¶4. (S) Jum said the letter would be given to Than Shwe on 
July 19, Martyrs Day (commemorating the assassination of 
General Aung San - Burma's national hero and the father of 
Aung San Suu Kyi).  Jum said he was confident the letter 
would actually be delivered to Than Shwe, as Jum is very 
close to a monk that is a personal aide to the Senior 
General.  (Jum said he would provide COM with a copy of the 
letter.) 
 
¶5. (S) Jum asked if the USG's tough position on trade 
sanctions and punitive measures against the regime could be 
softened by the release of Aung San Suu Kyi.  He specifically 
asked, "So, if they release Aung San Suu Kyi, would that be 
enough for the United States?"  COM told Jum that the release 
of ASSK was extremely important and should take place 
immediately, but that the USG remained committed to the 
resolution of the even larger problem of the SPDC's failure 
to live up to its stated commitment to national 
reconciliation.  The COM told Jum that the USG would not ease 
up its pressure for release of all political prisoners, 
improved human rights for all Burmese and credible signs of 
commitment to a transition to democracy. 
 
¶6. (S) Comment: We feel strongly that Jum was on a mission 
from not just the ethnic leaders re the planned appeal to 
Than Shwe, but also from Khin Nyunt.  Jum seemed disappointed 
by COM's response to his question regarding the "softening" 
effect ASSK's release would have on the USG's toughening 
Burma policy.  Given Jum's closeness to Secretary One, it was 
an excellent opportunity to reinforce the USG message via 
this channel.  End Comment. 
Martinez