This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV KJUS GT
SUBJECT: ANOTHER LANDMARK TOPPLED: MACK CONVICTION 
OVERTURNED 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 2605 
 
     ¶B. GUATEMALA 1084 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: On May 7, the Fourth Court of Appeals 
overturned the Third Sentencing Court's October 3, 2002 
conviction of Colonel (ret.) Juan Valencia Osorio (Ref A). 
The Fourth Court of Appeals also found Helen Mack's appeal of 
the acquittal of General (ret.) Edgar Godoy Gaitan and 
Colonel (ret.) Juan Oliva Carerra invalid (Ref B).  All three 
defendants were released immediately.  The Ambassador 
attended the appeal and spoke with the press afterward (para 
4).  Helen Mack intends to appeal to the Supreme Court within 
the allotted 15 days. Our public statements on this are 
crafted to support the trial process without interfering. End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Fourth Court of Appeals released their decision on 
the Mack case on May 7, to an overflowing courtroom filled 
with family members, human rights advocates, and pro-military 
observers.  Outside the courtroom, ex-PACS were protesting 
and disgruntled would-be observers jostled for position. 
When the Ambassador arrived - a sign of the intense US 
interest in the case - he was verbally harassed by members of 
a tense and partisan crowd as he entered the courtroom. 
 
¶3. (U) The Fourth Court of Appeals decided that there was a 
contradiction in the Third Sentencing Court's October 3, 2002 
decision.  They said that the Third Court was erroneous in 
finding one defendant guilty for a crime that came out of a 
chain of command, even though Valencia Osorio admitted that 
he transmitted the order to assassinate Myrna Mack. 
 
¶4. (U) After the release of the decision, the Ambassador told 
the press: "We believe this case is of enormous importance 
for the Guatemalan system of jurisprudence.  We of course 
respect the decision of the Guatemalan judiciary.  At the 
same time, we find it extremely disappointing that, 13 years 
after such a barbarous crime, its intellectual authors remain 
free." 
 
¶5. (U) HROff spoke to Helen Mack shortly after the verdict. 
She said that she was horribly disappointed that the 
Guatemalan justice system had again failed her, and that she 
would appeal the Fourth Court's decision to the Supreme Court 
immediately.  She and her team of lawyers have fifteen days 
to formulate their new appeal. 
 
¶6. (U) COMMENT: We are disappointed that yet another landmark 
conviction in a human rights case has been overturned by the 
Fourth Court of Appeals (the first being Gerardi, also in 
October 2002).  We will remain vigilant in our efforts to 
protect Helen Mack and her team from threats, and to support 
justice for the killing of Myrna Mack. 
 
¶7. (U) COMMENT CONTINUED: We do not have yet an assessment on 
juridical grounds of the latest sentence. Nor do we know yet 
what the prospects are of overturning the Appeals Court 
verdict. We will pursue both questions with our contacts. The 
Embassy will also release a statement along the lines of the 
Ambassador's statements (para 4), and we encourage the 
Department to do likewise. 
 
¶8. (SBU) COMMENT CONTINUED: We continue to walk a fine line 
on this case: we support Helen Mack's quest for justice, but 
we do not want to be perceived as interfering in the judicial 
process, which would be counterproductive for the Mack case 
and our overall human rights objectives. 
HAMILTON