This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/27/2008 
TAGS: PGOV IZ YM
SUBJECT: PEACEFUL DEMONSTRATION AGAINST WAR IN IRAQ IN SANAA 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1/5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (U)  A large, peaceful and well-controlled demonstration 
was held on January 27 in Sanaa expressing solidarity with 
the Iraqi and Palestinian people and protesting a possible 
war in Iraq.  Demonstrators gathered from different points 
around the city to converge in mid-morning near the United 
Nations common premises (approximately 25 minutes away from 
the U.S. Embassy).  The demonstration was billed as a 
general, all-party demonstration, and prominent Yemeni 
politicians took part.  Presidential Advisor Abdul Karim 
al-Iryani and Speaker of Parliament Sheikh Abdullah Ahmar 
both gave speeches and marched with the demonstrators.  Crowd 
estimates vary widely from 250,000 to 5,000, with the latter 
being a likelier number.  Post used its radio net and warden 
message systems to warn Amcits to avoid non-essential travel 
during the demonstration, which did not approach the Embassy 
premises. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Post received early warning of possible 
demonstrations through press reports and contacts.  It was 
apparent early in the day that the ROYG was well-prepared for 
the demonstration, with hundreds of security officials 
deployed around Sanaa and concentrated near the United 
Nations complex.  According to security officials, several 
busloads of protesters from varying tribal areas were brought 
in for the demonstration.  A senior Yemeni security official 
estimated the crowd in front of the UN at 250,000.  Embassy 
assets estimate, however, a crowd closer to 5,000. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Although the demonstration appeared to be 
well-controlled and peaceful from the beginning, post decided 
to warn Amcits to avoid non-essential travel during the 
demonstration through its radio and warden message systems 
early in the morning.  By 12:15, post was able to disseminate 
an all-clear message that the demonstration was over and the 
participants were dispersing peacefully. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Comment:  Indications such as the high-profile 
participants involved and the detailed security presence show 
that the demonstration was probably orchestrated in part by 
the Yemeni government as a way to let the Yemeni public blow 
off steam.  It was peaceful and well-controlled, boding well 
for the ROYG's ability to control future demonstrations and 
ensure security.  End comment. 
HULL