This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/12/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON EFIN PINS TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S NEW GOVERNMENT: MORE ON ERDOGAN'S TIMING 
 
REF: ANKARA 1546 
 
 
(U) Classified by Polcouns John Kunstadter; reasons: 1.5 
(b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: AK leader Erdogan likely to submit his 
candidate cabinet list March 13.  Possible he will emerge as 
Prime Minister in office as of that date.  Still no 
convincing sign, however, that he intends to pass a 
parliamentary resolution approving U.S. troop deployment in 
the next five-six days.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Three contacts from ruling AK Party and a journalist 
with close ties to AK's leadership tell us party chairman 
Tayyip Erdogan is likely to submit his candidate cabinet list 
to President Sezer Thursday, March 13.  Another AK contact 
sees the list not being submitted until March 17.  Erdogan 
becomes P.M. in office as soon as Sezer approves a list and 
sends it to parliament, so it is possible Erdogan will assume 
the post by March 13. 
 
 
¶3. (C) AK Party parliamentary group deputy chairman Fatsa, 
party deputy chairman for foreign policy Disli, outspoken 
human rights and anti-corruption advocate and AK M.P. Yarbay, 
and journalist Cengiz Candar told us separately March 12 they 
think Erdogan will submit his list March 13.  Fatsa, Yarbay, 
and Candar opined that the shuffle of current cabinet members 
may be limited to half a dozen; Candar foresees Erdogan's 
cabinet as substantially more action-oriented than the 
cabinet of outgoing P.M. Abdullah Gul. 
 
 
¶4. (C) In addition, while acknowledging that much is indexed 
to the results of UNSC deliberations March 13, Candar said he 
expects Erdogan to submit a new draft resolution approving 
deployment of U.S. troops early the week of March 17.  For 
their part, Yarbay and Fatsa reiterated the need for the U.S. 
to give Erdogan an incentive to submit the draft resolution; 
both mentioned, among other things, "guarantees" on Turkey's 
post-Saddam role, on the status of the Turkmen, and on the 
U.S. commitment against an independent Kurdish state. 
 
 
¶5. (C) AK M.P. Turan Comez, who had served as Erdogan's 
private secretary until last autumn's general election 
campaign, told us March 12 he expects the cabinet list to 
emerge March 17.  Comez expects a substantial shuffle, 
involving a dozen posts; he affirmed that his name is under 
consideration for the Health Ministry.  With better contacts 
among the mass of AK M.P.s than most others, Comez has been 
an accurate predictor of trends in AK, but in this case his 
is the outrider view. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Comment: Deputy chairman Disli and Erdogan's secretary 
confirmed to us March 12 that Erdogan was continuing to work 
on his cabinet list late into the evening, which we interpret 
as evidence he is aiming to present his list March 13.  We 
continue to tell interlocutors that time is running out for 
the GOT to pass a deployment resolution. 
PEARSON