This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001379 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/13/2013 
TAGS: EPET PINS ASEC PGOV PHUM NI
SUBJECT: WARRI CRISIS UPDATE 13AUG03 
 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1328 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1354 
 
 
1.(U) Classified by Counselor James Maxstadt for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
2.(C) A Warri-based member of U.S. NGO "IFESH" informed 
Corporate Responsibility Officer (CRO) late August 12 of a 
new attack on Gbomwei, an Ijaw village in the Warri area. 
The attack, reportedly launched by Itsekiri militants, began 
at 5:30pm local August 12. Gbomwei is near the Warri 
refinery, within eyesight of Warri town, and had been 
attacked by Itsekiris on August 2. (Ref A).  Delta State 
Police Commissioner Charles Akaya confirmed the August 12 
attack in a phone conversation August 13, but could not 
confirm a local press report (Daily Times) of 10 deaths in 
Gbomwei and an additional attack the same day on a second 
Ijaw village. 
 
 
3.(C) CRO spoke with Ijaw national leader Chief Edwin K. 
Clark, who stated that he would meet with the leaders of the 
Ijaw militant group "FNDIC" on August 13 and urge them not to 
retaliate against the Itsekiri.  In a separate conversation 
with CRO, Ijaw Youth Council activist Dimieari Von Kemedi 
stated that he had relayed a message to his colleagues in 
FNDIC urging them not to be provoked by this attack.  Von 
Kemedi opined that an Ijaw counter-attack is precisely what 
the Itsekiri seek  in order to precipitate intervention by 
the Nigerian military. 
 
 
4.(C) On a separate subject, Shell appears to be closely 
involved in the Nigerian military's plans for a large-scale 
deployment in the Warri area, according to Chevron's security 
advisor, Hamish MacDonald. This tracks with the recent 
revelation from Shell's Security manager in Warri that Shell 
is providing the army with helicopters for reconnaissance. 
(ref B) 
 
 
 
 
LIBERI