This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 004389 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS IZ JO MEPP
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN FM MUASHER AND RUSSIAN FM IVANOV DISCUSS 
ROADMAP, IRAQ 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 04361 
 
     ¶B. AMMAN 04313 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David Hale for Reasons 1.5 (B)&(D). 
 
¶1. (C) Charge and PolCouns met July 15 with Ali al-Ayed, 
Director of Foreign Minister Muasher's Private Office, and 
Samer Dabbas, the Private Office Iraq action officer.  In 
addition to discussions on the formation of the Iraqi 
Governing Council (reported ref a), Ayed gave a read-out on 
Muasher's July 14 talks with Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov. 
 According to Ali, Ivanov recounted his recent meetings with 
both PNA Prime Minister Abu Mazen and PNA President Arafat 
and said that in his opinion, the two Palestinian leaders 
differed on the means to implement the roadmap, rather than 
on the roadmap itself.  Ivanov recognized, however, that 
Arafat was trying to &maneuver8 in order to gain position 
over Abu Mazen. 
 
¶2. (C) For his part, Muasher raised with Ivanov his proposed 
&Arafat package,8 i.e., his plan for the international 
community to accommodate Arafat so as to prevent Arafat from 
undermining Abu Mazen, and his ambitious ideas to push 
forward the roadmap.  (Note: all these proposals were 
reported ref b notal.)  Muasher  pressed Russia to work with 
the Quartet to gain concessions from Israel on:  a) release 
of Palestinian prisoners; b) dismantling of Israeli 
settlements; and c) improved living conditions for the 
Palestinian people.  Muasher further asked Ivanov to work on 
the Syrians to be "more proactive on their support of the 
roadmap8 and to stop seeking a separate roadmap for 
Syria/Lebanon. 
 
¶3. (C) While talk of the peace process had dominated their 
discussions, Ayed noted that Muasher and Ivanov had briefly 
discussed Iraq, agreeing to coordinate statements at a July 
14 joint press conference cautiously welcoming the new 
Governing Council.  At the conference, Ivanov described the 
Council as &a step on the right track,8 although he also 
remarked that, &This step must be followed by others which 
would allow the creation of a legitimate authority in Iraq.8 
 Muasher similarly deemed the Council as &a positive step, 
hopefully towards the formation of a government elected by 
the Iraqi people and that would transcend sectarian 
representation.8 
 
¶4. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
HALE