This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 005336 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/20/2013 
TAGS: PGOV KISL JO
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN ISLAMISTS USE PARLIAMENTARY PLATFORM TO 
AIR GRIEVANCES, SLAM U.S. POLICY 
 
Classified By: Charge David Hale for Reasons 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) The Islamic Action Front (IAF), political arm of the 
Jordanian Muslim Brotherhood, bounded onto the political 
scene in Jordan this month after boycotting the political 
process since 1997.  Relishing its newfound legitimate voice 
in the Jordanian Parliament, the IAF aired longstanding 
grievances with the government and strongly condemned U.S. 
policy vis-a-vis Iraq and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. 
Beyond the parliamentary forum, IAF and MB officials issued 
statements denouncing U.S. regional policy, opinions that 
resonate strongly with the Jordanian population at large. 
While few MPs quibbled with the Islamists take on U.S. Middle 
East policy, the IAF's critique of government policies drew 
fire from many MPs, some charging that such rhetoric provoked 
sedition.  The IAF will use its new voice in the Parliament 
to press the government on its grievances and grandstand on 
those issues which resonate most with Jordanians.  However, 
the group's rhetoric will do little to sway ordinary 
Jordanians to their ranks without a more substantial 
political platform and a demonstrated willingness to work 
with the new government and achieve concrete results.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
IAF's Bold Criticism of Government Draws Rebuke 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2. (U) Taking advantage of its newfound public voice in the 
Parliament, the political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood, the 
Islamic Action Front (IAF), offered bold statements this 
month harshly criticizing the Jordanian government and U.S. 
policy vis-a-vis Iraq and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
Newly elected IAF Members of Parliament (MPs) condemned what 
they view as the government's corruption and nepotism, and 
charged that Abul Ragheb's Cabinet was not operating in 
accordance with Islamic Sharia.  IAF MP Ali Utoum (Irbid, 1st 
District) slammed the Jordan First motto, saying it promoted 
"egotism, arrogance, and fanaticism." 
 
¶3. (U) IAF Deputy Mohammed Abu Fares (Amman, 5th District) 
accused the prime minister of allowing his "gladiators," 
referring to the security forces, to enter a mosque with dogs 
and attack people gathered in Mahatta neighborhood who were 
showing solidarity with the Palestinians.  He claimed the 
incident left an IAF leader wounded.  Abu Fares added that a 
government "that normalizes with Israel and allows American 
troops to sully its soil does not deserve my confidence." 
 
¶4. (U) The IAF criticism surprised observers because the 
Islamic bloc's initial joint statement delivered by Assam 
Hneidi (Amman, 1st District) was relatively moderate in tone 
as he pledged to work with the government in the interest of 
national unity.  "We want to stress that we agree with the 
government on every issue that serves national interests," he 
said, promising that every positive step from the government 
would be reciprocated. 
 
¶5. (U) IAF Deputy Nidal Abbadi (Amman, 6th District) said his 
vote depended on the fulfillment of two conditions: the 
implementation of Islamic Sharia and the annulment of 
Jordan's peace treaty with Israel.  Abbadi also referred to 
Ahmed Daqamseh, the jailed soldier that opened fire on 
Israeli schoolchildren in Jordan, presenting the prime 
minister a handmade key chain bearing the word "Mabruk," or 
"Congratulations," as a gesture of good will in hope of a 
pardon for Daqamseh. 
 
¶6. (C) The IAF MPs' speeches drew sharp rebukes from other 
lawmakers, who suggested such comments verged on sedition. 
"The speeches were inflammatory and skeptical of even the 
legitimacy of national unity, which we take pride in, 
prodding dissent and undermining the solidarity and security 
the Kingdom enjoys," said MP Ghaleb Zu'bi (Balqa, 1st 
District).  "Issuing a religious edict that our national 
unity is not Islamic and inciting disintegration ...projects 
personal interests."  Zu'bi's comments provoked an outburst 
from Utoum, who shouted that deputies had the right to say 
whatever they wanted at the podium.  Former Amman mayor and 
health minister Mamdouh Abbadi (Amman, 3rd District) jumped 
into the fray, warning Utoum to "Stay silent."  Christian MP 
Odeh Qawwas (Amman, 3rd District) told PolCouns that he is 
already fed up with "the extremists" in the IAF in Parliament 
and hopes the IAF leadership would corral "the four hard core 
extremists" among IAF MPs. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Islamists, Non-Islamists Alike Slam U.S. Policy 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶7. (U) Whereas the MPs were of many minds with regard to 
domestic issues, there was wide consensus in one area during 
the parliamentary session: rejection of U.S. policies 
vis-a-vis Iraq and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.  All IAF 
MPs strongly denounced the U.S. occupation of Iraq and 
rejected the Middle East roadmap, saying the plan only served 
to boost Israel's security at the expense of the Palestinian 
people's aspirations. 
 
¶8. (U) Public comments from MB officials complemented the 
IAF's rhetoric inside Parliament.  For example, in the 
aftermath of the bombing of the Jordanian embassy in Baghdad, 
a Muslim Brotherhood statement on August 10 squarely placed 
the blame for the attack on the "unjust" U.S. occupation, 
charging that the situation was encouraging chaos and the 
killing of innocent people.  In an interview with al-Ra'i 
newspaper on August 7, MB Deputy Supervisor General Hammam 
Said called on the Iraqi Islamists to leave the Provisional 
Governing Council. 
 
¶9. (U) The IAF on August 17 issued a statement that was 
carried by al-Jazira satellite television urging the 
government to reject U.S. "pressure" to send forces to Iraq 
or to recognize the Iraqi Governing Council. It urged Arab 
and Islamic governments to follow suit and instead "support 
the Iraqi resistance by all means."  (Subsequently, PM Abul 
Ragheb said Jordan would not join a peacekeeping force in 
Iraq until there is an elected government there.) Meanwhile, 
the group welcomed official government statements stressing 
Iraq's unity and the right of the Iraqi people to determine 
their own future, according to local press. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Preview Glimpse into IAF's Domestic Agenda 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. (U) The IAF's comments and actions since the June 
election have provided a small window into its domestic 
agenda.  Complementing its call for the implementation of 
Islamic Sharia law during the parlimentary session, the IAF 
continues to lobby strongly for its version of public 
morality.  On August 3, IAF deputies joined tribesmen and 
independents in rejecting temporary laws that advanced 
womens' rights in Jordan.  The laws gave women the right to 
divorce and raised the legal age of marriage for both sexes 
to 18.  Many observers were baffled that two women MPs, 
including IAF MP Hayat Mseimi (Zarqa), voted against these 
changes.  They justified their position saying that such laws 
only facilitated divorce and harmed the family.  Meanwhile, 
IAF MP Musa Wahsh (Amman, 2nd District) denounced the 200 
plus night clubs in Amman and other "immoral" aspects of life 
in the Kingdom as detrimental to the fabric of Jordanian 
society. 
 
¶11. (U) The IAF's campaign rhetoric and parliamentary 
speeches suggest that the group prides itself on advocating 
the cause of the economically deprived.  Favoritism and 
government nepotism are attacked as both morally wrong and 
obstacles to the emergence of a more egalitarian society. The 
IAF promotes the consolidation of national unity through 
greater equality among all citizens, particularly in the job 
market, which it says should be free of consideration of an 
individual's personal background or relationships. The IAF 
boycotted the municipal elections on July 26 (except for in 
greater Amman) to protest Municipal Law  No. 70, which allows 
the government to appoint up to half of all municipal 
councils and all mayors, with the remainder subject to public 
election. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12. (C) Now that it has a legitimate public forum in the 
Parliament, we expect the IAF to use every opportunity to 
condemn U.S. policy, particularly regarding Iraq and the 
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Such rhetoric resonates with 
most Jordanians, even those outside the IAF's main support 
base.  Given the strong rebuke the IAF faced in Parliament, 
it will be interesting to see if it will temper future public 
criticism of Abul Ragheb's government, at least in the near 
term, to show that it is willing to work within the system to 
encourage positive change for ordinary and poorer Jordanians, 
the core of its main constituency. 
 
 
 
 
HALE