This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 004864 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/01/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: TURKISH MFA READY TO START TALKS ON PKK/KADEK 
 
REF: ANKARA 4787 
 
 
(U) Classified by Charge d'Affaires Robert S. Deutsch. 
Reason: 1.5 (b,d) 
 
 
¶1. (S) In a Aug. 1 meeting, MFA Deputy Undersecretaries Baki 
Ilkin and Nabi Sensoy told Charge that the Turkish side will 
be ready to begin discussing cooperation on the presence of 
PKK/KADEK in Northern Iraq after the "re-integration" law 
(reftel) is signed by President Sezer and published in the 
Official Gazette.  Ilkin said he believes Sezer will sign the 
law "within the next couple of days."  Ilkin told Charge that 
Sensoy will head the Turkish delegation, which will be 
composed of MFA DDG for Intelligence Kemal Asya -- who, we 
understand, handles PKK/KADEK-related issues -- and 
representatives from the Turkish General Staff (TGS), the 
Jandarma, and the Turkish National Intelligence Organization 
(TNIO).  Ilkin asserted that the MFA will work to keep the 
activities of the delegation participants -- including both 
Turkish and American names -- out of the press, although the 
fact of cooperation should be known. 
 
 
¶2. (S) Sensoy sought Charge's clarification of USG ultimate 
intentions are regarding PKK/KADEK.  "You have used the word 
'elimination;' what do you mean by that?" he asked.  Sensoy 
thanked Charge for Embassy's efforts to discourage a 
delegation from the Kurdish DEHAP from meeting with PKK/KADEK 
in Northern Iraq.  He also thanked Charge for publicly 
denying the recent "Hurriyet" article that claimed PKK/KADEK 
leaders will be granted asylum in Norway.  He, nevertheless, 
noted that the article had generated some "concern," which is 
likely "to linger in Turkish minds." 
 
 
¶3. (S) Charge stressed that, as we have noted before, the new 
Iraq will be neither a sponsor of nor a safe haven for 
terrorists.  The U.S. intent, Charge emphasized, is to 
eliminate Iraq as a safe haven for terrorists of any kind. 
Part of this is getting the PKK/KADEK militants to return to 
Turkey -- voluntarily with the impetus the "re-integration" 
law provides or involuntarily.  With regard to the latter, 
Charge said, the U.S. is considering options and will be 
interested in sharing intelligence with the Turkish forces in 
Iraq.  He noted that U.S. forces have a number of priority 
tasks in Iraq, which could also impact the planning for 
PKK/KADEK.  Charge asked Ilkin and Sensoy to provide 
information on what the MFA considers as the PKK/KADEK 
leadership cadre, so that we can be better informed and have 
an opportunity to respond should these individuals seek to 
disperse in Iraq or depart the region. 
 
 
¶4. (S) Both Ilkin and Sensoy emphasized that allowing 
PKK/KADEK militants to escape to Europe is not an option. 
Ilkin said that the leadership "would be even more dangerous 
to Turkey in Europe than they are right now in Iraq." 
DEUTSCH