This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOI/USGS:ANNA LENOX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NL PREL SENV OTRA
SUBJECT: MEPN - WORKING GROUP ON WATER RESOURCES:COUNTRY 
CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR U.S. DELEGATION TO WATER MEETING IN 
AMSTERDAM, AUGUST 23-30, 2003 
 
REF: SECSTATE 226593 
 
 ¶1.  Country Clearance is granted for the MEPN - WORKING 
GROUP ON WATER RESOURCES U.S. DELEGATION for travel to The 
Netherlands August 23-30, 2003. 
 
¶2.  Kami Witmer will be the Control Officer.  She can be 
reached at the following numbers/addresses:  Tel: (W) 
31-70-310-9339, (H) 31-70-354-0639, (M) 31-65-172-4767.  Fax: 
(W) 31-70-310-9348.  Email:  (W) witmerka@state.gov; (H) 
kwit88@hotmail.com.  Please note:  When dialing telephone/fax 
numbers within the Netherlands, replace country code 31 with 
a zero. 
 
COMPUTER and ELECTRONICS USAGE: 
 
¶3.  Inter-agency security standards prohibit the introduction 
or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software at all 
USG diplomatic facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all 
secure areas of the Mission. 
 
¶4.  Travelers who anticipate having special needs in terms of 
either access or computer usage should contact the RSO office 
before arriving at post. 
 
 
SECURITY ADVISORY: 
 
¶5.  Post provides the following threat assessment for The 
Netherlands: The Department of State on July 29, 2003 issued 
a worldwide caution to alert Americans of the need to remain 
vigilant.  The Department of State reminds U.S. citizens of 
the continuing threat of terrorist actions that may target 
U.S. citizens and and to update these potential threats.  The 
U.S. Government remains deeply concerned about the security 
of U.S. citizens overseas.  U.S. citizens are cautioned to 
maintain a high level of vigilance, to remain alert and to 
take appropriate steps to increase their security awareness. 
 
Tensions remaining from the recent events in Iraq may 
increase the potential threat to U.S. citizens and interests 
abroad, by terrorist and other groups.  Terrorist actions may 
include, but are not limited to, suicide operations, 
hijackings, bombings or kidnappings.  These may also involve 
commercial aircraft.  other potential threats include 
conventional weapons such as explosive devices or 
non-conventional weapons, such as chemical or biological 
agents.  Terrorists do not distinguish between official and 
civilian targets.  These may include facilities where 
American citizens and other foreigners congregate or visit, 
including residential areas, clubs, restaurants, places of 
worship, schools, hotels, outdoor recreation events or 
resorts and beaches.  U.S. citizens should remain in a 
heightened state of personal security awareness when 
attendance at such locations is unavoidable.  Please consult 
the Department's web site for text: http://travel.state.gov. 
In light of this caution all visitors to The Netherlands are 
encouraged to assess their security posture and be alert to 
their surroundings for possible surveillance.  All visitors 
should exercise caution while traveling abroad, as U.S. 
citizens and facilities are often the target of groups 
demonstrating opposition to U.S. foreign policy. 
 
¶6.  A concern for visitors is crime.  Most crimes against 
official Americans are limited to pick-pocketing and luggage 
theft.  Vandalism to automobiles, and theft from hotel rooms 
are not unknown.  Recently, theft of laptop computers has 
increased, especially at Schiphol airport and major train 
stations.  The thieves operate in small groups, are 
determined and well practiced at distraction theft.  Several 
official travelers have been victimized lately, losing 
personal and unclassified government computers, valuable 
software and data.  Regulations require the use of the 
diplomatic pouch for shipment of classified equipment and 
information. 
 
¶7.  Streets can be walked in relative safety, but as in any 
U.S. urban city, the same amount of caution should be 
exercised after dark in the more populated cities of The 
Hague, Amsterdam, and Rotterdam. Red-light districts and 
public transportation hubs are common locations for incidents 
of street crime. 
 
 
RUSSEL