This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T OTTAWA 002115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NP/RA, NP/MNA, IO/T, NEA/NGA AND WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2013 
TAGS: KNNP PARM MNUC PREL IR CA IAEA
SUBJECT: IAEA/IRAN: CANADA AGREES ON NEED TO MOVE UP EL 
BARADEI REPORT BUT DOUBTS AUGUST 15 IS DOABLE 
 
REF: (A) STATE 210913 (B) OTTAWA 1670 (C) OTTAWA 2109 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Canada agrees with us that the IAEA Director General's 
next report on Iran needs to be issued prior to August 29 in 
order to mount an effective campaign before the September 
8-12 Board of Governors meeting (ref. A), but believes that 
August 15 may not be feasible.  Terry Wood, Foreign Affairs' 
Deputy Director for Non-Proliferation, told us on July 23 
that the extended absences of El Baradei and of Deputy DG 
Goldschmidt (who will be returning from leave on August 18) 
and the need for a thorough report will make it difficult for 
the IAEA to proceed two weeks earlier.  But Wood said that we 
must have more time to prepare for this BOG meeting than we 
had in June, when the DG's Iran report came out on the 6th 
and the BOG meeting was held on the 16th.  Exactly how far in 
advance of August 29 is the challenge. 
 
¶2. (S) Wood said that Canada has an added complication if the 
DG's report is moved up to August 15.  Another GoC agency is 
preparing to provide "sensitive information" on Iran to the 
IAEA Secretariat, and had not planned to do so before 
mid-August (the Secretariat's informal deadline for 
submissions to be considered in the report is August 15). 
Wood was unsure whether or how much the sharing of this 
information, which was out of Foreign Affairs' hands, could 
be accelerated.  Wood was not suggesting the report be held 
up on account of this, but said that Canada wanted to bring 
the information to bear on the report if at all possible. 
(NOTE: Canada has not previously shared intelligence with the 
IAEA, and is grappling with how to do so.  The GoC has 
informed us (ref. B) that it has intelligence from the late 
1990s regarding nuclear activity at Kalaye.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶3. (C) The GoC continues to push both the Iranian Government 
and the IAEA on full disclosure and full accountability. 
Wood said that Canada's Ambassador in Vienna is meeting with 
IAEA Acting DG Waller on July 24 to reiterate Canadian 
concerns, including moving up issuance of the Iran report, 
maintaining a rigorous approach to inspections, and using all 
the IAEA's tools, including special inspections.  Wood told a 
Secretariat official earlier this month that if Iran did not 
 
SIPDIS 
agree to environmental sampling at Kalaye, Canada would push 
for a special inspection to be conducted there.  Wood was 
preparing a letter from Minister Graham to El Baradei 
reiterating these messages, and said that Graham discussed 
Canadian concerns again this month with Iranian FM Kharazzi. 
He noted that Canadian access in Tehran will be more limited 
now that the Canadian Ambassador has been recalled over the 
death in custody of Canadian photojournalist Zahra Kazemi 
(ref. C). 
 
¶4. (C) Overall, Wood was pessimistic about bringing Iran 
around.  He noted that experts who travelled with El Baradei 
to Iran this month had returned early because of the lack of 
cooperation by the Iranians.  Wood said that the IAEA's 
investigation was showing additional Iranian work with 
nuclear materials that had not been declared. 
CELLUCCI