This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2013 
TAGS: PREL CY NL TY
SUBJECT: SCC WESTON MEETS WITH DUTCH MFA 
 
REF: THE HAGUE 2636 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Sobel for reasons 1.5 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  SCC Amb. Tom Weston, accompanied by Amb. 
Sobel, met with MFA Political Director Hugo Siblesz on 
November 24, followed by a meeting with MFA deputy Political 
Director for European Affairs Schaper, deputy DG for European 
Affairs Ed Kronenberg, and DCM Russel.  Weston briefed MFA 
counterparts on his visit to Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus and 
outlined the possibilities for a Cyprus settlement in coming 
months.  He strongly encouraged the Dutch and the EU to make 
forward leaning statements before and immediately following 
the December 12-13 EU Council meeting, which precedes 
elections in northern Cyprus by one day. Encouragement that 
prospects for accession negotiations were good if Turkey 
further implements necessary reforms and advances the 
settlement of the Cyprus issue would positively influence 
Turkey's planned new year initiative on Cyprus.  Siblesz 
stressed that domestic politics will prevent the GoNL from 
actively campaigning for Turkish accession, and the Dutch 
Presidency of the EU in the second half of 2004 is a blessing 
in disguise:  rather than opposing a decision to start 
negotiations, the GoNL can "hide" behind the impartiality of 
its Presidency.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) SCC Amb. Weston met with MFA policy makers in the 
Hague on November 24, and outlined his recent meetings in 
Turkey, Greece and Cyprus.  Weston stressed the importance of 
positive statements in upcoming weeks and months by the EU on 
Turkish prospects for opening EU accession negotiations as an 
incentive for both the political leadership in Turkey and the 
populations in Cyprus to achieve a workable solution to the 
Cyprus question.  In view of the Turkish intention to launch 
an initiative of some sort in January, the right message from 
Europe will help ensure the Turks accept the need to get the 
parties back into negotiations before May on the basis on 
Annan 3.  MFA DirGen for Political Affairs Hugo Siblesz 
thanked Weston for the briefing, and agreed on the importance 
of the next few months.    However, Siblesz stressed Prime 
Minister Balkenende's disappointment with his recent visit to 
Ankara, calling the meeting with Prime Minister Erdogan "a 
stonewalling."  According to Siblesz, Erdogan said of Cyprus, 
"It's your problem, not ours.  You allowed Cyprus to enter 
without meeting the political criteria."  Siblesz believes 
Turkey missed a "real chance" to communicate the right 
message to Balkenende, particularly in light of the future 
Dutch EU presidency. 
 
¶3. (C) Balkenende's message to Ankara was that if no 
settlement has been achieved by December 2004, Turkey's 
accession will be "very complicated" (ref A).  Weston 
stressed the importance of European member-state leaders 
making encouraging statements before the EU Council meeting 
December 12-13.  Such statements could positively affect the 
December 14 election outcome in northern Cyprus, allowing the 
opposition to gain votes and momentum. (Note:  Weston stated 
positive statements by the EU Council are also important, but 
the Council meeting, ending the day prior to elections, is 
not likely to make a strong impact.  End Note.)  Because of 
strong domestic pressure against Turkish membership, Siblesz 
said Balkenende will not commit himself to moving beyond the 
Commission's report.  Siblesz also made it clear the Prime 
Minister would be "hard pressed" to go beyond his statements 
in Ankara, but that the Dutch EU presidency might be a 
blessing in disguise.  Rather than letting negative political 
sentiment coalesce into opposition to opening accession talks 
with Turkey, the GoNL will be able to play the impartiality 
card of the Dutch EU presidency. 
 
¶4.  (C) In a separate meeting, MFA Deputy DirGen for European 
Affairs Ed Kronenburg and MFA Deputy DirGen for Political 
Affairs were slightly more positive.  Kronenburg fully 
understood Weston's desire for strong, early statements by 
the EU in favor of Turkish membership, comprehending that 
waiting too long will remove any momentum for a solution in 
Cyprus.  Kronenburg and Schaper will discuss such options 
with other EU members.  However, Schaper again noted the 
strong domestic pressure on the government against Turkish 
membership will prohibit Dutch leadership on this issue in 
public fora. 
 
¶5. Amb. Weston cleared this cable. 
SOBEL