This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KATHMANDU 000057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS AND DS/IP/NEA 
STATE ALSO PLEASE PASS USAID/DCHA/OFDA 
USAID FOR ANE/AA GORDON WEST AND JIM BEVER 
MANILA FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA 
LONDON FOR POL/REIDEL 
TREASURY FOR GENERAL COUNSEL/DAUFHAUSER AND DAS JZARATE 
TREASURY ALSO FOR OFAC/RNEWCOMB AND TASK FORCE ON TERRORIST 
FINANCING 
JUSTICE FOR OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL/DLAUFMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PTER CASC PGOV NP IN
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  UPDATE ON MAOIST ACTIVITIES, JAN 4-10 
 
Reference:  Kathmandu 0050 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  Interpol has issued five more warrants for Maoists, 
bringing the total to sixteen.  The Government of Nepal 
(GON) and the Maoists still have not agreed on a date for 
peace talks, but the GON announced a plan aimed at 
rehabilitating Maoists.  The insurgency, meanwhile, has 
created a demand for passports from people trying to escape 
the violence, overwhelming administrative offices and 
leaving some unable to fulfill requests.  Maoists continue 
to destroy infrastructure and kill innocent civilians.  Six 
security personnel were killed and twenty injured after 
being ambushed by Maoists.  Maoists also killed the vice- 
president of a school, a Nepali Congress worker, and a man 
they accused of being an informant for security forces. A 
civilian was killed when he was caught in the crossfire 
between Maoists and security personnel.  One hundred and 
forty students kidnapped from one district by Maoists were 
released, but over 100 remain in captivity.  Maoist activity 
has forced the shutdown of many small businesses.   The GON 
announced that nine people in custody under suspicion of 
being Maoists were released. 
 
INTERPOL ADDS MORE MAOISTS TO WARRANT LIST 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  Interpol issued Red Corner Notices against five 
additional Maoist leaders on charges of terrorism, armed 
robbery and murder.  The list, now totaling sixteen, already 
includes the top two Maoist leaders, Prachanda and Dr. Babu 
Ram Bhattarai. 
 
NO SIGN OF PEACE TALKS; GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES REHAB PLAN 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3.  Narayan Singh Pun, Minister for Physical Planning and 
Works, said the Government of Nepal (GON) has devised a plan 
to rehabilitate Maoists and turn them into "responsible 
citizens."  Pun said the Disarm, Demobilize, Rehabilitate 
and Reintegrate (DDRR) program was finalized by the GON and 
is awaiting cabinet approval.  The DDRR program is designed 
to show Maoists that there are alternatives to war and 
violence, and assist in rehabilitation and reintegration 
into society.  Training and employment opportunities would 
also be made available. Pun said participants would remain 
in the training camps for six to eight months.  The program 
will be launched in the mid-western development districts, 
which are the most heavily affected by Maoists. The GON 
hopes the program, scheduled to start January 15, will help 
end the insurgency. 
 
MAOIST CAMPAIGN CAUSING INCREASE IN PASSPORT REQUESTS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶4.  The Maoist insurgency has created a flood of people 
requesting passports in order to escape the violence. 
District Administrative Offices (DAO) in Palpa, Gulmi and 
Arghakhanchi have depleted supplies of passport books, and 
are currently unable to process any further applications 
until more books are dispatched by the Ministry.  Netra 
Prasad Sharma, Chief District Officer (CDO) of Gulmi, said 
that young people are leaving to escape the "one-house one- 
person " conscription campaign carried out by the Maoists, 
in which every household is forced to contribute at least 
one youth to join the insurgents.  Other villagers are 
leaving out of fear for their safety.  Maoists control the 
western part of Gulmi, while parts of Palpa, Syangja, 
western Tanauhu and Nawalparasi Districts also have been 
overrun by the Maoists. 
 
¶5.  Abandoned headquarters in Dolakha District also have 
caused public administration to come to a standstill.  The 
Chief District Officer (CDO) and assistant CDO have left the 
headquarters for other posts, leaving local residents unable 
to obtain citizenship papers, passports and other necessary 
documents.  The Ministry of Home Affairs has been unable to 
send any replacement officers due to security concerns. 
 
INSURGENCY CRIPPLING VDC INFRASTRUCTURE 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Village Development Committee (VDC) buildings have been 
hit hard by the Maoist insurgency.  According to the VDC 
National Council, 1369 out of a total 3915 VDC offices have 
been destroyed by Maoist attacks since the Maoists began 
their "People's War" in 1996.  VDC personnel have also been 
targets of the Maoists.  Thirty-three VDC representatives 
have been killed, thirty-two have been abducted, and 
fourteen have been assaulted. 
 
MAOIST CONTINUE TO MURDER 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  On January 3 Maoists ambushed and killed three members 
of the Armed Police Force (APF) and three members of the 
Royal Nepalese Army (RNA) in Banke District.  Over twenty 
security personnel were also injured in the fighting. 
Maoists abducted and later killed the vice-president of a 
secondary school from Taplejung District on January 6.  In 
Pyuthan District, Maoists shot and killed a man they said 
was an informant for security forces.  A civilian was killed 
in Udayapur District when he was caught in the crossfire 
between Maoists and security forces.  On January 9 a group 
of armed Maoists shot and killed a Nepali Congress activist 
in Rautahat District, after dragging him from his home. 
 
MAOISTS KIDNAP STUDENTS 
----------------------- 
 
¶8.  Students across Nepal are fleeing Maoist-infested areas 
to avoid being kidnapped or forcibly recruited by the 
Maoists.  According to reports from Dipayal District, the 
absence of students has resulted in over a dozen schools 
being closed.  Children have fled their schools and homes to 
avoid the Maoists, who have threatened torture for those who 
defy their orders.  Police said over two dozen students are 
currently staying in hotels to escape forced recruitment. 
 
¶9.  According to newspaper reports, 140 students kidnapped 
by Maoists in western Doti District were released after a 
short period of captivity, but more than 100 remain in the 
custody of the insurgents.  The kidnappings in Doti mirror 
similar abductions of children in surrounding western 
districts.  These reports, if verified, indicate that the 
number of students kidnapped is much higher than previous 
accounts (reftel).  The children were released on the 
condition that they be readily available to join the Maoists 
when needed.  Most of the released children have reportedly 
fled to district headquarters and India to avoid 
conscription. 
 
MAOISTS DESTROY BUILDINGS 
------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Maoists destroyed a Village Development Committee 
office in Kavre District on January 3.  The insurgents 
seized the office and set fire to all the documents and 
furniture.  On January 3 the Maoists also set off a pressure 
cooker bomb at a Lalitpur District ward office, causing 
severe damage to the building. 
 
MAOISTS IMPOSE CURFEWS, SHUT DOWN BUSINESSES 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Maoists have banned the manufacturing and sale of 
alcohol in Salyan District.  According to locals, the Maoist 
Women's Organization has warned of severe consequences for 
those who possess or purchase alcohol.  Many villagers in 
the Salyan District depend on the sale of alcohol for their 
livelihood.  Because of the ban, most have had to find other 
means of income. 
 
¶12.  Maoist rebels have imposed a curfew on villagers in the 
Makwanpur District.  Residents are prohibited outside after 
7:00 pm.  According to villagers, the Maoists also plant 
landmines to prevent security personnel from entering the 
area. 
 
¶13.  The Maoist insurgency has caused many small businesses 
in Sunsari District to close.  Over half the businesses, 
ranging from tourism and agriculture to energy, have closed 
their offices, citing a lack of security and stability in 
the region as one of the causes.  Small business owners fear 
that if peace is not restored, industry will continue to 
decline. 
 
ACCUSED MAOISTS RELEASED FROM JAIL 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  In Siraha District nine people, jailed after the 
declared state of emergency on charges of being Maoists, 
were released on January 6 after thirteen months in jail. 
Among those released was Dev Kumar Yadav, a Nepali 
journalist who, at the time the state of emergency was 
declared, was working as a correspondent for the weekly 
newspaper "Janadisha," considered to be a mouthpiece of the 
Maoists. 
 
MALINOWSKI