This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR PRM/ANE, EUR/SE AND NEA/NGA 
DEPT PASS USAID FOR BHA/OFDA - WGARVELINK AND FFP 
EUCOM FOR JE, JR, J5, SOJ7 AND POLAD 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
CENTCOM FOR J3, J5 AND POLAD 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2013 
TAGS: EAID IZ PREF PREL TU
SUBJECT: TFIZ01:  MFA ON SOURCING AND TRANSIT OF FOOD FOR 
IRAQ AND OTHER HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE ISSUES 
 
 
(U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch for 
reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
 
¶1. (C) Emboffs and Disaster Assistance Response Team (DART) 
Leader discussed humanitarian planning issues on March 26 
with Feza Ozturk, MFA Head of Department for International 
Political Organizations.  In response to a looming shortage 
of wheat flour in northern Iraq, the World Food Program has 
applied to MFA for permission to send 6,000 tons of wheat 
flour across the border.  Turkey will shortly approve release 
of 50,000 tons of wheat flour from its strategic reserve for 
humanitarian purposes.  Ozturk confirmed that internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) had not sought refuge on Turkey,s 
borders.  Ozturk expects in the next several days to initiate 
the ad hoc humanitarian aid coordination group suggested by 
A/S Dewey earlier this month.  End Summary. 
 
 
WFP Transit: 
------------ 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ozturk told us that John Murray, the UN World Food 
Program Emergency Coordinator, had contacted him about 
emerging food shortages in northern Iraq, which had not 
received as great a level of advance rations as the center 
and south prior to the conflict.  Turkey is prepared to 
release 50,000 metric tons of wheat flour for Iraq from its 
strategic reserve, which would then be replenished by WFP. 
Ozturk stated that this would require Cabinet approval, 
expected within days.  Turkey would do everything possible to 
facilitate transportation of food relief to northern Iraq, 
but Ozturk warned that there could be transport bottlenecks 
slowing down the flow of aid.  He said the key problem is 
security for Turkish drivers and equipment delivering food to 
Iraq. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Murray told us later in the day that WFP was trying 
to address a Kurdistan Democratic Party request for wheat 
flour, and that he had formally requested MFA approval to 
ship 6,000 tons to Erbil on an emergency basis.  He said WFP 
had not addressed the security issue on the Iraqi side yet, 
but guessed that KDP authorities would make the necessary 
security arrangements. 
 
 
Current Situation on the Border and in Northern Iraq: 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ozturk confirmed that IDPs have not arrived at the 
Turkish border.  Instead, IDPs appear to be headed for rural 
areas, and particularly to higher elevations about 6 to 12 
hours from the border.  Turkey has not set up any camps and 
will not do so until they are needed. 
 
 
Coordination Mechanism: 
----------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Ozturk advised that the Turkish General Staff and 
other agencies had approved the concept of MFA hosting an ad 
hoc, civilian humanitarian assistance coordination meeting 
with the UN agencies and Embassy representatives.  He told us 
he could not call the first meeting until he received written 
confirmation of the interagency decision, which he expected 
in the next day or two.  Ozturk suggested the initial meeting 
include MFA, Embassy and a UNHCR representative.  Mission 
Disaster Relief Officer encouraged Ozturk to include a 
broader group from the UN, and particularly WFP.  Ozturk said 
he expected an interagency approval in the near future for 
the U.S. request to site humanitarian daily rations in Turkey. 
 
 
NGOs: 
----- 
 
 
¶6. (U) Ozturk stated that MFA was reviewing NGO applications 
for work in Turkey as well as for transit of goods to Iraq on 
an expedited basis.  He reiterated the GOT,s position that 
NGOs would be permitted to cross the border to respond to 
humanitarian needs, but that Turkey would consider carefully 
how many and which organizations should be approved. 
PEARSON