This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 000776 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPDC VM
SUBJECT:  FOREIGN MINISTER'S LETTER TO SECRETARY POWELL 
 
Ref:  Hanoi 0690 
 
¶1.  (U)  Foreign Minister Nien has written to the Secretary 
ostensibly to cite progress in bilateral ties but in reality 
to complain about the likely reintroduction in Congress of 
the Vietnam Human Rights Act and passage or expected passage 
at the city and state levels of various "flag bills" 
mandating the usage of the former South Vietnam flag 
(reftel).  He specifically asked for help in opposing both 
initiatives.  The Foreign Ministry will undoubtedly expect a 
response.  Embassy will pouch original to EAP/BCLTV.  Full 
text in para 2. 
 
¶2.  (U)  text of letter 
quote 
Minister for Foreign Affairs 
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam 
 
Hanoi, March 26, 2003 
 
TO:  H.E. Mr. Colin L. Powell 
Secretary of State 
 
SIPDIS 
U.S. Department of State 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary, 
 
I am writing to express my satisfaction with the recent 
positive development in Vietnam-U.S. relations.  Well under 
way are the talks aimed at speeding up the implementation of 
the Vietnam-U.S. Bilateral Trade Agreement and the Science 
and Technology Agreement.  The first round of talks on a 
Textile Agreement has been initiated and the last productive 
round of negotiation on the Aviation Accord has helped to 
narrow down the two sides' differences in this matter. 
Notably, the success of the 13rd Annual Asia Corporate 
Conference recently held in Hanoi by the Asia Society and 
Dow Jones & Company in collaboration with Vietnamese 
relevant agencies, has contributed to strengthening the 
investment and trade ties as well as the mutual 
understanding between our two countries. 
 
To ensure further development of the two countries' 
relations along this positive line, it is most essential to 
create a favorable political environment.  And you would 
agree with me this requires constructive efforts from both 
sides. 
 
As you may know, more than a year ago, the U.S. House of 
Representatives' passage of the Bill H.R. 2833 on Human 
rights in Vietnam resulted in a profound and widespread 
disappointment among the Vietnamese people.  Fortunately, 
thanks to the understanding and cooperation of the U.S. 
members of congress, particularly with the kind attention 
and efforts of yourself and your staff, this bill has been 
dropped.  However, some U.S. congressmen have recently been 
trying to re-introduce this very bill to the House of 
Representatives.  Negative impact on the Vietnam-U.S. 
relationship would therefore be extremely grave.  Moreover, 
while noting with appreciation the cooperation of the U.S. 
Government and your State Department in handling the Bill No 
2829 of the House of State of Virginia related to the 
deceased Saigon regime's flag, we are now very much 
concerned about recent moves by some City Councils in 
several cities, namely, Westminster, Garden Grove, 
California.  They have endorsed resolutions allowing the 
flag to be displayed at public buildings, schools, and at 
public functions of the Vietnamese-American community in 
those cities.  Moreover, we have just learned that the draft 
resolution ACR 68 is now being introduced at the Assembly of 
California.  Such actions have rekindled the past of hated 
among the Vietnamese-American communities in several other 
cities such as San Jose, Oakland, Santa Ana, Midway City, 
Huntington Beach, undermining the on-going process of 
national reconciliation and unity of the whole population of 
Vietnam.  At the same time, these actions have sent wrong 
signals about the U.S. Government policy as well as its 
observance of the law in this regard, namely to recognize 
only the National Flag of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam 
in our bilateral diplomatic relations.  Such above-mentioned 
developments are causing great disappointment within the 
Government and the entire people of Vietnam, obstructing the 
on-going process of mutual understanding promotion and 
damaging our greater and long-term interests in the Vietnam- 
U.S. relations. 
 
I do hope that, with your noble and responsible position, 
you and your capable staff in the Department of State would 
take all appropriate and timely measures to prevent and 
remove for good the Vietnam Human Rights Bill as well as the 
issue of allowing the display of the former regime's flag 
from our bilateral relations.  This will make a necessary 
move to contribute to our joint efforts to go beyond the 
past and towards the future, in line with the realities and 
vast interests of the relations between the Governments and 
peoples of Vietnam and the United States. 
 
Please accept, Mr. Secretary, the renewed assurances of my 
highest consideration.  I look forward to meeting you in 
person to discuss new steps to accelerate our bilateral 
relations. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
/s/ Dy Nien  /s/ 
Nguyen Dy Nien 
end quote 
BURGHARDT