This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 KATHMANDU 002501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS AND PRM/ANE, LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR 
MILLARD, GENEVA FOR PLYNCH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/23/2013 
TAGS: PREF PREL BH NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: BHUTANESE REFUGEES ANGERED OVER 
REPATRIATION CONDITIONS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. On December 22, the Nepal - Bhutan Joint 
Verification Team (JVT) visited Khudunabari Camp to brief 
refugees on conditions for repatriation to Bhutan.  According 
to the Bhutanese JVT members, Category I refugees will be 
returned with full citizenship rights; Category II refugees 
will be issued temporary identity cards, settled in camps 
with one member of each family entitled to work as laborers, 
health and education facilities will be provided, but freedom 
of movement will not be allowed; and Category IV refugees 
will be handed-over in police custody while their family 
members will be kept in a separate camp.  The refugees 
responded angrily, surrounded the JVT members and verbally 
attacked them.  As the JVT members attempted to leave the 
camp, refugees pelted them with stones, injuring one and 
damaging their vehicles.  The Bhutanese JVT members cut short 
their visit to Nepal, departing early on December 23 for 
Bhutan.  The refugees' angry reaction does not bode well for 
the future of the repatriation process.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On December 22, the Bhutanese and Nepal members of 
the Joint Verification Team (JVT) visited Khudunabari Camp in 
eastern Nepal for the first of a series of briefings to the 
refugees explaining conditions for repatriation to Bhutan. 
The Bhutan team was led by Dr. Sonam Tenzin while the Nepal 
team was led by Sushil Jung Rana, Joint Secretary at the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.  According to refugee leaders in 
Khudunabari Camp, the JVT's plan was to brief the heads of 
households of each of the 7 sectors over 7 days.  Khudunabari 
Camp's Sector A residents were, therefore, invited to 
participate in the briefing, which was held inside the 
community hall inside the camp.  Because the community hall 
can accommodate only roughly 100 people, the remaining Sector 
A residents stayed outside the hall listening to the briefing 
via microphone.  A UNHCR Security Officer was also present 
outside the hall.  The account described below was provided 
by refugee leaders present at the briefing.  Some of the 
statements have been confirmed by UNHCR, while others are 
awaiting confirmation. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Category I refugees, or those who were forcefully 
evicted from Bhutan, Tenzin reportedly indicated, would be 
repatriated in the first phase and would be issued 
citizenship cards upon arrival.  The 274 individuals in this 
category will enjoy the full rights of any Bhutanese living 
in Bhutan, he said.  Tenzin remarked, however, that any 
Category I refugee who sold his land either to the government 
or to a private buyer would not receive a land allocation. 
Those who had not sold their land would be granted substitute 
land in equal measure to the land registration document. 
According to refugee leaders, Tenzin opened the floor for 
questions regarding Category I refugees, but cut off the 
questioning before answering even the first question. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Category II refugees, or those who allegedly left 
Bhutan voluntarily, will be issued a temporary ID card upon 
arrival in Bhutan.  During the 2-year probation period, all 
family members must be physically present in Bhutan and 
cannot leave the country.  To qualify for citizenship, 
Category II refugees will not be required to read and write 
Dzongkha, but must speak Dzongkha and be familiar with 
Bhutan's history, culture and traditions.  Citizenship will 
not be granted if any re-applicant is found to have spoken 
against the King, the country or the people of Bhutan. 
According to the refugees and confirmed by UNHCR, Tenzin said 
that, after arrival in Bhutan, Category II returnees will be 
settled in camps, and one member from each family will be 
employed as laborers at road construction sites.  The 
returnees will be provided with health and education 
facilities, but will not have freedom of movement, he added. 
(Note.  The refugees have inferred from this that the Royal 
Government of Bhutan (RGOB) intends to allow only one member 
from each family to work, which they claim will not provide 
sufficient income for the entire family.  End Note.)  Tenzin 
also reportedly suggested that the RGOB will form a committee 
to interview the re-applicants for citizenship.  The 
refugees, as well as a the Chief District Officer of Jhapa 
District who was present at the scene, characterized the 
attitude of the Bhutanese JVT members as being "very harsh" 
and "intentionally provocative."  Some refugees believe that 
the RGOB is trying to discourage Category II refugees from 
returning to Bhutan. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Tenzin reportedly remarked that the JVT had 
completed its review of appeals submitted by Category III 
refugees (non-Bhutanese) and will recommend to the RGOB that 
no changes of status be made.  He would say nothing more than 
that the decision on the results of Category III appeals 
would be made by the government. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Category IV refugees who decide to return to Bhutan, 
Tenzin said, would be delivered to Bhutan by the Nepal Police 
and processed according to Bhutanese law.  The refugee 
leaders indicated, and UNHCR confirmed, that the families of 
those categorized as criminals would be kept in separate 
camps.  The refugee leaders fear this would stigmatize the 
families as "anti-nationals." 
 
¶7. (SBU) Following the Bhutanese JVT leader's briefing, the 
Government of Nepal (GON) representative, Sushil Jung Rana, 
claimed that the GON would treat all Bhutanese like any other 
foreigner applying for citizenship.  Free transportation for 
returnees and their household effects would be provided, he 
said.  According to the refugee leaders, Rana cautioned that 
action would be taken against refugees who attempt to leave 
the camps and integrate themselves in Nepal.  Rana also 
indicated that the GON is not responsible for any statement 
made by the Bhutanese JVT members. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Following the conclusion of the briefing, the 
refugees became aggressive, surrounded the JVT members and 
verbally harangued them.  The Chief District Officer of Jhapa 
reported that the refugees prevented the JVT members from 
departing the community hall.  Nepal police officers were 
stationed in the camps to provide security to the JVT, but 
were prevented from entering the hall by the refugees.  After 
an undetermined amount of time, the police officer in charge 
was able to enter the building and bring out the JVT members 
unharmed.  However, outside the hall, some refugees pelted 
stones at the JVT team, damaging the vehicles while they 
drove away.  One JVT member reportedly was hit on the head 
with a stone, later requiring stitches.  No other injuries 
were reported.  According to press reports, the Bhutanese 
members of the JVT departed Nepal for Bhutan the morning of 
December 23. 
 
¶9. (C) Comment.  The negative reaction on the part of the 
refugees is unsurprising, given the information provided by 
the JVT members.  If, as the refugees claim, the RGOB plans 
to settle Category II returnees in camps, restrict freedom of 
movement, and allow only one family member to work, the 
refugees have a right to question the sincerity of the RGOB 
in fulfilling the spirit of the bilateral agreement. 
Impressions given by the Chief District Officer in Jhapa that 
the Bhutanese JVT leader used "very harsh words" while 
explaining conditions for return seems to verify the 
refugees' opinion that the Bhutanese JVT appeared to be 
actively discouraging repatriation.  We had hoped that the 
JVT's visit to Khudunabari Camp would clarify conditions of 
return for the refugees.  Unfortunately, clarification has 
been achieved, but at a very steep price that could serve to 
lower the numbers of refugees who decide to voluntarily 
return to Bhutan.  End Comment. 
MALINOWSKI