This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 001846 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OSD FOR DASD IAN BRZEZINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR NL NATO
SUBJECT: DUTCH CONCERNS ABOUT FURTHER FRANCO-GERMAN EFFORTS 
ON MINI-SUMMIT AGENDA 
 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY CHARGE D'AFFAIRS DANNY R. RUSSEL FOR REASO 
NS 1.5 (B AND D). 
 
(A/S Beth Jones has cleared this cable.) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  In July 15 conversations with visiting 
Assistant Secretary Jones and the Ambassador, senior Dutch 
officials expressed concerns about Franco-German efforts to 
take concrete steps to implement decisions from the April 29 
"Mini-Summit," especially the establishment of a distinct EU 
military headquarters at Tervuren, Belgium.  The PM's foreign 
policy advisor shared his broader concern about German-French 
efforts to woo the UK (exploiting the pressures currently on 
Blair) and to pull other Europeans into their orbit.  While 
there appear to be differences within the Dutch foreign 
policy team as to how real a threat this is, they agree the 
idea is moving ahead, and urge a nuanced U.S. response so as 
not to "corner" the proponents and thus give impetus to their 
plans.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) In a July 15 meeting with the Ambassador, PM 
Balkenende's Foreign Policy Advisor Rob Swartbol (protect) 
raised concerns that the France/Germany/Belgium/Luxembourg 
April 29 Mini-Summit agenda, in particular, the idea of a 
separate EU military headquarters, was gaining ground within 
some European governments.  Swartbol said the EU's mission in 
Congo had lent momentum to the idea and suggested that a 
recent French, German and UK political directors meeting in 
Paris was aimed at getting the British onboard.  He asserted 
there was also a serious European effort to support the 
broader German-French agenda.  The EU headquarters idea is 
just one example.  Swartbol suggested several streams were 
feeding the initiative.  First, many in Europe were anxious 
to heal the rifts after Iraq and thus want to come together 
on a major foreign policy issue.  Others are motivated by 
resentments against the U.S.  In any event, France and 
Germany are forming a rallying point for Europe that could 
gain momentum and should not be ignored by the U.S. 
 
¶3. (C) Swartbol again raised this issue at a luncheon for 
visiting Assistant Secretary Jones on July 15.  MFA Deputy 
Political Director Herman Schaper (protect) said the Tervuren 
headquarters idea would not evolve into a "European SHAPE" 
since too many countries (including the Netherlands) oppose 
it.  He thought it would instead become like the Eurocorps, 
i.e., another element in the tool box of the European allies. 
 A/S Jones said the U.S. had been concerned that Prague 
Summit decisions and Berlin Plus were being undercut by the 
April 29 Mini-Summit.  Schaper said the German Chancellor's 
office had been putting pressure on the Netherlands to join 
the project, claiming that the UK was now more supportive. 
His suggested approach was to avoid dramatizing French-German 
efforts, and said there would never be consensus for an ESDP 
based on distancing Europe from the U.S.  MFA Director for 
Security Policy Maurits Jochems (protect) suggested that the 
U.S. reach out to the French and German defense ministries, 
which oppose the Tervuren idea. 
 
¶4. (C)  Comment:  Dutch concern about the potential for 
Franco-German efforts to create rifts within Europe and 
across the Atlantic prompted the cautionary note to be 
sounded by the PM's Foreign Policy Advisor.  He is clearly of 
the view that, while the U.S. should not resist European 
integration, Washington needs to be aware and careful of 
Paris-Berlin initiatives. However, all agreed that 
heavy-handed U.S. objections to the proposal would likely 
have the opposite effect and result in the Franco-German 
proposal gaining more European support. End Comment. 
RUSSEL