This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

180741Z Sep 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/17/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR, ANKARA MAYOR DISCUSS LOCAL 
ADMINISTRATION, UPCOMING COURT CASE AGAINST KURDISH DEHAP 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 5848 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman. Reason: 1.5 (b,d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In a Sept. 15 meeting with the Ambassador, 
Ankara mayor Melih Gokcek expressed hope that the AK 
Government will pass local administrative reform.  He expects 
that the more controversial aspects of the reform will be 
taken up after local elections, which are scheduled for next 
April.  Gokcek said that the High Election Board is coming 
under pressure to increase DYP's representation in 
Parliament, which would shrink AK's overwhelming majority. 
Gokcek firmly believes that if this occurs, P.M. Erdogan will 
call for new elections.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) After warmly greeting the Ambassador, Gokcek 
outlined the administrative challenges facing the city.  He 
said his office had recently distributed textbooks, which 
were fully funded by the Government, to all primary school 
students.  Cooperating with local businesses, the 
municipality had raised enough funds to purchase additional 
computers for schools.  Gokcek said transportation issues -- 
road and metro construction and dealing with harsh winter 
weather -- will occupy most of his time in the run-up to 
local elections, which are currently scheduled for April. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador thanked Gokcek for the municipality's 
close cooperation with Embassy on security matters.  In 
particular, the Ambassador noted that the vehicle barriers on 
Paris Caddesi should act as a deterrent against vehicle 
bombs.  The security of the Embassy is important not only for 
Embassy employees but also for Turkish citizens living 
nearby.  Gokcek agreed, saying "we are ready to help in any 
way." 
 
 
--------------------------- 
Local Administrative Reform 
--------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) The mayor, who joined the ruling AK Party last month, 
explained that the Government is currently drafting 
legislation regarding local and public administrative reform. 
 Noting that he has contributed to the Government's draft 
substantively, Gokcek said that, if passed, the new laws 
would give some additional authority to municipalities.  He 
complained, however, that the more controversial aspects of 
reform -- that is, providing municipalities the legal means 
to collect additional revenues and freely allocate resources 
-- are on hold.  These reforms will probably not be taken up 
until after next spring's local elections.  Gokcek attributed 
the delay to resistance from some parts of the military but 
did not elaborate. 
 
 
---------- 
DEHAP Case 
---------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Commenting on the outstanding case against the 
pro-Kurdish DEHAP Party (reftel), Gokcek said he believed the 
higher court would uphold a previous ruling that DEHAP did 
not participate in the Nov. elections legally.  Gokcek said 
that left to its own devices, the High Election Board (YSK) 
would not annul the election results or allocate additional 
seats to the center-right True Path Party (DYP).  However, 
Gokcek claimed that the YSK is coming under pressure from 
"certain circles" -- a turn of phrase often used by our 
Turkish interlocutors to refer to Establishment elements in 
the military and judiciary -- who are uncomfortable with AK's 
huge parliamentary majority.  Although no one wants to cancel 
the election results -- which could lead to political chaos, 
Gokcek said -- AK's rivals want to clip the party's wings and 
make it harder for AK to change the constitution. 
 
 
¶6. (C) If the election results are annulled, Gokcek believes 
support for AK in any new election will be higher than the 34 
percent the party received last Nov.  In Ankara, for example, 
AK is polling seven percent higher now than in November, 
according to data collected by Gokcek's office.  The mayor 
noted that xenophobic Genc Party is also polling above the 
ten-percent threshold to get into Parliament.  He claimed 
that disaffected voters from the main opposition, center-left 
CHP are now supporting Genc. 
 
 
¶7. (C) If the YSK allocates additional seats to DYP, Gokcek 
said that P.M. Erdogan will immediately call for early 
general elections.  "I am not saying 99 percent; I am 100 
percent certain the P.M. will go to elections in that case." 
EDELMAN