This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 001035 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, MARCH 22: WAR IN IRAQ 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Kuwaiti commentators complain that Arab world 
media continue to be biased towards Kuwait, and ask 
rhetorically why other Arabs do not decry Iraq's launching 
of surface to surface missiles against Kuwait in recent 
days. One commentator lauds Kuwaitis for their behavior on 
the first night of the war writing, "Every single person was 
at his or her post, unlike what happened in 1990." 
 
Photos of US and British medics treating injured Iraqi POWs 
were featured prominently in all Kuwaiti newspapers. Kuwaiti 
dailies report that the GOK will donate a total of USD 12 
million for aid to the Iraqi people. Kuwaiti cooperatives 
(grocery stores) have begun to make gas masks available to 
the general public, and all newspapers report huge crowds in 
front of the Saudi Embassy seeking visas to leave Kuwait by 
land (Note: Most Kuwaitis appear today to believe that the 
threat from Iraq has receded.) End Summary. 
 
¶2. News stories: All newspapers prominently published 
photos, some on the front pages, of US and British soldiers 
offering medical treatment to Iraqi POWs. 
 
Al-Seyassa and Al-Anba learned that Kuwaiti authorities 
captured seven Iraqi soldiers on Kuwait's Warba Island after 
their boat came under attack by coalition forces. 
 
All newspapers report Ministry of Defense spokesman Col. 
Yousef Al-Mulla's announcement that three Kuwaiti Patriot 
missiles successfully destroyed an Iraqi SCUD missile 
launched towards Kuwait on March 21. 
 
All newspapers report that Kuwait's Permanent Representative 
to the UN Mission in Geneva, Ambassador Darrar Al-Rozouqi, 
announced that Kuwait will donate USD 2 million to UNHCR to 
aid Iraqi refugees. Al-Seyassa daily also reports that the 
Director of the Humanitarian Aid Center, retired General Ali 
Al-Moumen, said that Kuwait will be sending USD 10 million 
in installments to aid the Iraqi people. 
 
All newspapers report that the Ports Authority of the 
Ministry of Interior announced that expatriates in Kuwait 
without a valid visa will be allowed to leave without paying 
a fine. 
 
Thousands of expatriates queued in front of the Saudi 
Embassy yesterday for visas to transit by land through Saudi 
Arabia to their home countries, all newspapers report. 
 
Secretary-General of the Kuwait Journalist Association, 
 
SIPDIS 
Faisal Al-Qanaie, in comments published in Al-Rai Al-Aam and 
Al-Qabas, questioned why there were no demonstrations in any 
Arab country denouncing Iraqi missile attacks on Kuwait. 
 
Arab League Secretary-General, Amr Moussa, described Iraq's 
missile attacks against Kuwait as a "negative development," 
and stressed that the Arab league does not approve of these 
attacks, Al-Qabas and Al-Watan report. 
 
All newspapers report that cooperatives (grocery stores) in 
Manusira and Abdulla Al-Salem areas of Kuwait City announced 
they will be selling one thousand gas masks to Kuwaiti 
citizens residing in the two areas; other cooperatives are 
also making plans to sell gas masks. 
 
Editorials 
 
¶3.  "The First Day of War" 
MP Ahmad Al-Rubei wrote in independent Al-Qabas (3/22):  "We 
should be proud of how the first day of the war went 
domestically. Every single person was at his or her post, 
unlike what happened in 1990 when we were invaded by Iraq. 
We lived with the sounds of [air raid] sirens on the first 
day of the war, and we succeeded in dealing with them. This 
current war is an opportunity to regain the trust in our 
government, our military institutions and ourselves." 
 
¶4.  "Kuwait and the Media War" 
MP Abdelmohsen Jamal wrote in independent Al-Qabas (3/22): 
"At this time of war, we need a distinctive media plan. to 
focus on the Iraqi missile aggressions against Kuwait, and 
to realize that the Iraqi regime will not hesitate to 
threaten Kuwait in any possible way. We have to inform the 
world that the Iraqi media is lying by denying such attacks 
against Kuwait. Our official media must be transparent and 
balanced in order to win this media war." 
 
¶5.  "The Media of Defeat" 
Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/22): 
"As was expected, the allied forces led by the US were able 
to occupy a big part of Iraq without resistance.  but we 
were astonished at how some media were not objective in 
presenting facts and figures. It was very obvious that the 
Arab media were siding with Iraq-- which is normal because 
they reject any aggression on any Arab country-- but to 
broadcast lies denying what other foreign media were 
reporting is not acceptable. The Arab satellite channels 
were not subjective in their analysis and they used 
sentimental language in their reporting. Therefore, the 
foreign media reporting was more truthful, realistic and 
more credible because they broadcast facts as they happen." 
 
¶6.  "The Fall of Basra: How and When" 
Abdelrahman Al-Ajmi wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/22): 
"America and Britain will be in an embarrassing situation if 
Basra does not fall quickly into the hands of their forces 
this week. This situation will result in putting both 
countries under international pressure. It is also certain 
that the American and British forces are concerned about 
minimizing their loses and about the safety of the Iraqi 
people also." 
 
¶7.  "A War On the Dark World" 
Abdelamir Al-Torki wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/22): 
"The war is not against Iraq. It is a war against the dark 
world, which failed to establish justice, democracy and 
freedom. The war is against Saddam Hussein, the biggest 
tyrant and oppressor. The war is against the Arab regimes 
that are living, in the dark ages. The war on Saddam is a 
war against the world, which rejects globalization and the 
establishment of a new world system. We thank God that the 
war on Saddam has been initiated from Kuwait to put an end 
to Arab dark regimes." 
 
 
JONES