This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101248Z Dec 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 008050 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQI POLICE TRAINING IN 
JORDAN AND ISRAEL'S SEPARATION WALL, Dec. 9 and 10 
 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- Lead stories in all papers, December 9 and 10, 
highlight King Abdullah's visit to the U.S. and his 
remarks to the New York Police Department emphasizing 
that "Islam is a religion of tolerance".  Other lead 
stories highlight the U.N. decision to refer the 
Israeli separation fence to the World Court and the 
two explosions in Iraq, wounding 58-59 American 
soldiers.   An editorial in the mass-appeal daily Al- 
Arab Al-Yawm sharply criticizes the training of  Iraqi 
police in Jordan.  . 
 
     Editorial Commentary on Training Iraqi Police 
 
-- "The final and comprehensive victory of the 
Jordanian comprador" 
 
Columnist Nahed Hattar writes on the op-ed page of 
independent, mass-appeal Arabic daily Al-Arab Al-Yawm 
(12/09), "We had thought that we are facing the same 
old story: performing a `political' task in return for 
a financial deal for the treasury, a deal that would 
help the state face the difficult repercussions of the 
new oil bill since the end of the related Iraqi grant. 
Our opposition to this [the training of Iraqi police 
in Jordan] stemmed from national concern.  The Iraqi 
police now is the occupier's fence and their tool in 
opposing the Iraqi resistance and in establishing an 
Iraqi regime, which -even if it were not an agent and 
ally of Israel and a sword upon the throats of the 
Arabs - would have political, social and security 
specifications that prevent the re-establishment of 
the strategic bilateral relationship that once existed 
between Amman and Baghdad.  In other words, we, 
ourselves, are contributing to the fettering of our 
country.  We had thought that the Jordanian government 
is making this strategic mistake to serve its tactical 
interests. 
 
And here's the surprise.  This strategic mistake, with 
all its very serious dimensions, which affect the 
security of Jordan and the future of Jordanian-Iraqi 
relations, is being handed on a silver platter to a 
private company..  A local private company is the 
middleman between the American occupation authorities 
in Iraq and an American company that will manage the 
training process for the occupiers, and all this on 
Jordanian soil, with the approval and encouragement of 
the Jordanian government.  But of course, the story 
has a positive angle: this process will provide 
hundreds of job opportunities for the unemployed 
Jordanians!" 
 
   Editorial Commentary on Israel's Separation Wall 
 
-- "The smart move that angers America even before 
Israel" 
 
Daily columnist Mohammad Amayreh writes on the op-ed 
page of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al- 
Dustour (12/10):  "No doubt, referring the issue of 
Israel's separation wall between Palestinian 
territories occupied in 1948 and the rest of the 
Palestinian territories to the international court of 
justice in the Hague is a smart move to be hailed and 
supported..  Israel's anger at such a move might just 
be justifiable, since it is the party directly 
concerned and affected, but America's remarks opposing 
this move are completely out of place and needlessly 
reflect complete bias in favor of Israel.  The United 
States gets itself involved in such issues without 
considering their sensitivity and the potential for 
rousing Arab enmity towards U.S. policy, despite the 
fact that the U.S. administration continues to pose 
the nagging question: why do they hate us?  Washington 
has been biased in favor of the Zionist entity ever 
since its establishment on the land of Palestine and 
has continued to provide all support and assistance.. 
The tragic thing about this is that the United States 
believes that this should not prevent anything and 
that the Arabs should accept it and the Palestinians 
should bless it, and that if they do not, then it is 
terrorism.  The Arabs and the Palestinians found no 
protection in the Security Council from the Israeli 
arrogance and hegemony.  All the Security Council 
resolutions that condemn Israel came face to face with 
the American veto.  Their only refuge, therefore, is 
the General Assembly where they enjoy an obvious 
supporting majority for their issues, particularly the 
Palestinian issue..  We welcome this move and we 
believe it is a new opportunity for the Arabs and the 
Palestinians to regain some of their rights, that is 
if the higher court of justice's rulings are binding 
for Israel." 
 
HALE