This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/31/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER MARR MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S INTRODUCTORY CALL ON DEFENSE 
MINISTER: GONUL PLEDGES TO SUPPORT THE US IN ANY WAY HE 
CAN, THANKS US FOR ASSISTANCE ON PKK, EU, ECONOMY 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 250602 
     ¶B. STATE 250578 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman.  Reasons 1.5 B and D. 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (C) During the Ambassador's introductory call on Minister 
of National Defense Vecdi Gonul September 1, Gonul affirmed 
his desire to foster closer cooperation with the US and to 
support the US in any way Turkey could.  On Iraq, Gonul said 
he hoped the GOT would persuade the Turkish public and 
Parliament that Turkey needed to be there with the US.  Gonul 
praised the Governing Council and its Turkmen member Songul 
Chapuk.  He raised difficulties with third-country defense 
transfers, frustration with the lack of firm dates for the 
2004 Istanbul NATO Summit and for the November 2003 HLDG. 
Gonul thanked the US for supporting Turkey's EU candidacy, 
for our firm stand against the PKK, and for US support during 
the economic crisis that began in 2001. End Summary. 
 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
 
¶2. (C) The Ambassador, accompanied by ODC Chief and Pol-Mil 
officer (notetaker), called on Defense Minister Gonul Sept. 
¶1.  Gonul said that in 1991, he had worked with PM Ozal to 
get Turkey to send troops to Iraq, and failed.  The Turks 
failed again on March 1.  "This time," he said, "I hope we 
make the necessary preparations and persuade everyone that we 
have to be there with you."  He said the stability of Iraq 
was extremely important to Turkey, as the Turks and Iraqis 
live virtually together, and many families have members on 
both sides of the border.  The GOT believes it must help the 
Iraqi people achieve some kind of order, he said.  "The US 
and Turkey have the same target.  We have to be there.  Our 
military, diplomats and parliamentarians are trying to decide 
the right way forward.  I hope we can manage it and keep it 
on the right track this time."  He also said the sooner the 
Iraqi economy is up and running, the better. 
 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador assured Gonul that POTUS remains 
committed to seeing things through in Iraq, and that the US 
would be there as long as it takes.  The Ambassador also 
welcomed the GOT statements condemning the Najaf bombing 
(more detail on this point septel).  Gonul commented that the 
CPA had put together good people in Iraq and that the 
Governing Council (GC) was working well.  He noted that 
Turkey had some differences about the level of Turkmen 
representation, but that the Turkmen rep on the GC was a very 
good one.  He opined that there was still a major problem 
with the tribes, which would impact the GC's moral authority 
as well as the economy in Iraq. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
Defense Trade, NATO Summit, HLDG, PKK 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Gonul pointed out that Turkey had bought a large 
amount of military materiel from the US and has been trying 
to build its defense industry jointly with the US.  However, 
he said, due to licensing and other restrictions from the US 
side, it was difficult to export what it produced.  The 
Ambassador assured him that third-party licensing was a 
complicated issue world-wide, not just in Turkey, and that we 
were trying to streamline the process.  Turning to other 
matters, Gonul said Turkey was trying to organize the 2004 
NATO Summit in Istanbul, but the extended silence procedure 
on dates being maintained by the US at NATO was hampering 
efforts.  "We need a reply on the date to begin preparations. 
 This is a big organizational challenge, and we don't want to 
be embarrassed."  The Ambassador noted Turkey's concern and 
said he would do what he could to get a firm date as soon as 
possible.  Gonul said that dates were also urgently needed 
for November's HLDG meeting, which was supposed to have taken 
place last May. The Ambassador said that the US and Turkey 
together need to use the HLDG better and to ensure the next 
meeting is well prepared.  He undertook to get more clarity 
on dates from OSD.  ODC Chief noted that the dates under 
consideration at present were November 20-22.  Gonul thanked 
the US for supporting Turkey's EU candidacy and for 
supporting Turkey through the economic crisis that began in 
¶2001.  He also noted that the US was the only western nation 
that truly opposed the PKK/KADEK. 
 
 
¶5. (C) The Ambassador reminded Gonul of POTUS' pledge to 
eliminate the threat of terror from Iraq.  The US remained 
committed to that objective and hoped to continue the 
discussion with the GOT on this issue.  American commanders, 
he noted, already had a good deal on their plate and there 
would need to be a process of prioritization.  The Ambassador 
added that we would be pushing the Europeans shortly to 
extend their designation of PKK as a terror organization to 
KADEK and to go after KADEK financing.  The Ambassador also 
noted the importance of Turkey "sticking to the IMF program" 
as a means of stimulating a pattern of stable economic 
growth.  Gonul said that he and Turkey greatly appreciated 
America's assistance in these matters. 
¶6. (U) Baghdad Minimize Considered. 
EDELMAN