This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 KATHMANDU 002472 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS, LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PREF ECON NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: A/S ROCCA'S DECEMBER 16 MEETING WITH THE 
PRIME MINISTER 
 
REF: A. A. KATHMANDU 1805 
     ¶B. B. USDAO KATHMANDU IIR 6867 0028 03 
 
Classified By: Assistant Secretary Christina Rocca for reasons 1.5 (B,D 
) 
 
------ 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C)  On December 16, Christina Rocca, Assistant Secretary 
for South Asian Affairs, accompanied by Ambassador 
Malinowski, met with Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa to 
discuss Nepal-U.S. bilateral relations and Nepal's ongoing 
Maoist insurgency.  Thapa expressed the GON's appreciation 
for USG assistance with the Maoist insurgency.  Rocca 
stressed the importance of the Government of Nepal (GON) 
upholding high standards on human rights, indicating that 
violations could affect U.S. security assistance. Thapa 
assured A/S Rocca that human rights were an area of mutual 
concern.  Thapa assured A/S Rocca that proposed "Village 
Defense Committees" are intended to "re-motivate" villagers 
with a higher security presence.  Thapa stated that the King 
is committed to holding elections within the next six months 
and expressed hope that the political parties will join the 
Government following an official announcement of elections. 
The Prime Minister, A/S Rocca and Ambassador also discussed 
Bhutanese refugees, Nepal's entry into the WTO and SAARC. 
End Summary. 
 
------------ 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
¶2.  (C) On December 16, Christina Rocca, Assistant Secretary 
for South Asian Affairs, accompanied by Ambassador 
Malinowski, met with Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa to 
discuss Nepal-U.S. bilateral relations and Nepal's ongoing 
Maoist insurgency.  Thapa explained that Nepal is undergoing 
two crises: the Maoist insurgency and the lack of consensus 
between the Government of Nepal (GON) and the political 
parties.  Thanking A/S Rocca for USG support to counter the 
insurgency, Thapa requested that the U.S. continue to provide 
military and other assistance to combat the problem.  A/S 
Rocca responded that continued USG support would be affected 
if the GON failed to take a strong stand to protect human 
rights according to international standards.  Noting the 
recent incident in Ramechhap (ref A), A/S Rocca said that 
although the Maoists commit frequent abuses, Nepal's security 
forces must be held to a higher standard.  A/S Rocca 
requested that Thapa pass the message to all involved parties 
that human rights are important for future cooperation and 
assistance.  Thapa acknowledged that promoting and preserving 
human rights are areas of mutual concern.  Indicating that 
the GON had heard this message from many donors in Nepal, 
Thapa stated that Nepal is committed to human rights--a 
commitment demonstrated in its various human rights cells 
within the security forces.  Noting that an investigation is 
underway on the Ramechhap incident, Thapa indicated that 
appropriate action will be taken once findings are complete. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Clarification on the Proposed "Civic Peace 
and Development Mobilization Committee" 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C)  A/S Rocca asked Thapa to clarify the "Village 
Defense Committee," now known as "Civic Peace and Development 
Mobilization Committee" (ref B), asking if the GON plans to 
create a militia or to arm civilians, as news reports allege. 
 Thapa responded, "As you know, the press here is not 
reliable.  They have a tendency to distort facts and 
manufacture truths."  He explained that the concept is not 
intended to aggravate the conflict further by arming 
civilians.  Instead, the purpose is to establish a  security 
presence in the villages and to "re-motivate" the villagers. 
(Note: Royal Nepalese Army officials clarified this statement 
later.  See RNA briefing information septel. End Note.) 
 
¶4.  (C) Saying he wanted to debunk rumors that the GON is 
becoming an increasingly militarized state, Thapa assured A/S 
Rocca that the military remains under the control of a 
civilian committee.  This committee, which he as Prime 
Minister chairs, is responsible for directing military 
operations and the movement of security forces around Nepal. 
(Note: The PM is technically correct in saying the Army is 
run by a civilian authority, which he chairs.  What he 
neglected to say, however, is that the only other member of 
that committee is the Chief of Army Staff.  Despite their 
status as Chairmen of the National Defense Committee, Prime 
Ministers historically have had little or no role in 
directing military operations.  The King wields the ultimate 
authority over the Army in his capacity as Head of State and 
as Supreme Commander.  End Note.) 
 
---------------------- 
Committed to Elections 
---------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Thapa said that the GON is committed to a "road map" 
of socio-economic and political development.  Aspects of this 
road map, according to Thapa, include ensuring village 
security, delivering needed services and combating 
corruption.  The ultimate goal of the road map is to hold 
both municipal and parliamentary elections.  Thapa indicated 
that the GON has made several overtures to political parties 
to join the Government in the fight against the Maoists. 
During the cease-fire negotiations, Thapa claimed that GON 
made it a point to notify and consult with the party leaders. 
 The political parties, according to Thapa, have assured the 
GON that they will participate and support both local and 
parliamentary elections when they are held.  Thapa said he 
believes that once there is a formal declaration of 
elections, the parties will rejoin the Government.  A/S Rocca 
replied that cooperation between the GON and political 
parties was essential in order to deny the Maoists the 
opportunity to exploit partisan differences. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Thapa says he expects elections sometime within the 
next six months, but noted that this needs to be discussed 
with the newly appointed Election Commissioner.  Endorsing 
the GON's commitment to work with the political parties on 
elections, A/S Rocca questioned whether security would be a 
prerequisite for holding elections.  Thapa stated that it 
would be best if the Maoists went back to the negotiating 
table and noted that the King has set a deadline of six 
months to restart negotiations.  Even if this does not 
happen, Thapa emphasized that the King is committed to 
holding elections in a phased manner and transferring power 
back to the people. 
 
¶7.  (C) Thapa requested continued USG cooperation on security 
assistance.  A/S Rocca explained that the FY 2004 budget 
would not be finalized until early February 2004 at the 
earliest.  Noting that USG assistance levels are being scaled 
back around the world, A/S Rocca stressed that it was too 
early to tell what the levels for Nepal might be, she 
indicated that the GON should be prepared to settle for less 
assistance as a result of this trend.  She added that since 
human rights and democratization issues are the utmost 
concern in all levels of the USG, GON should make an strong 
effort to show its commitment on these matters. 
 
------------------------------- 
Other Issues: 
Bhutanese Refugees, WTO, SAARC 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Thapa expressed the GON's appreciation for the USG's 
support for Bhutanese refugee repatriation and on Nepal's 
entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO).  A/S Rocca 
said that the USG is committed to a long-term solution to the 
Bhutanese refugee problem, noting that there were a number of 
matters to be resolved like the registration and resettlement 
of those repatriated to Bhutan.  From recent meetings with 
Bhutanese officials in association with the upcoming SAARC 
Summit, Thapa said he believes that the Bhutanese Government 
is interested in solving this matter.  With regard to WTO, 
the Ambassador and A/S expressed their congratulations to 
Thapa on Nepal entering the WTO. 
 
¶9.  (C) Although Thapa indicated that he was initially 
concerned that Indo-Pakistani relations would cloud dialogue, 
he is now confident that the SAARC Summit in Islamabad, 
January 4-6, will be a success. A/S Rocca agreed that SAARC 
is a potential important building block of the Indo-Pakistani 
bilateral relationship.  She endorsed SAARC as a mechanism 
not only to improve the dialogue between India and Pakistan, 
but also to lift the economic and political levels of all 
member countries.  The Ambassador and A/S Rocca wished Thapa 
well on his final meetings in Bangladesh and the Maldives to 
complete coordination on the proposed South Asian Free Trade 
Agreement (SAFTA). 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10.  (C)  A/S Rocca's emphasis on the importance of human 
rights is especially timely, as the Royal Nepal Army reopens 
its investigation into the incidents at Ramechhap.  Given the 
persistent climate of mistrust between the GON and the 
political parties, as well as the shaky security situation, 
we find the suggestions that elections can be held in six 
months overly optimistic.  Before the elections can occur, 
there must be some glimmer of reconciliation between the 
parties and the GON.  Not only would the parties have to 
agree to participate, but they also would need time to 
rebuild the party organizations that have been shattered 
across the countryside by Maoist violence.  End Comment. 
 
¶11.  (U) A/S Rocca has cleared this cable. 
MALINOWSKI