This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 002757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, AND PM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/24/2013 
TAGS: PBTS PREL MOPS ES HO
SUBJECT: HONDURAS ANXIOUS TO MOVE EL SALVADOR BORDER 
DEMARCATION PROCESS FORWARD 
 
REF: A. TEGUCIGALPA 2221 
 
     ¶B. PALMIERI/WAGNER EMAIL 11/17/03 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Francisco Palmieri; 
reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: As part of the on-going effort to demarcate 
the Honduran-El Salvador border, on November 11 OAS envoy, 
NIMA specialist John Gates, awarded over one square kilometer 
of territory to El Salvador that was originally designated to 
Honduras by the 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
decision.  Although the decision generated substantial press 
interest decrying the loss of national territory, the 
Government of Honduras (GOH) is far more concerned with 
moving the demarcation process forward as fast as possible. 
The GOH remains committed to honoring its international 
obligations and continues to view Gates as an honest broker, 
although Honduras believes Gates overstepped his bounds in 
his latest decision.  While the GOH stands ready to implement 
Gates' decision, Honduras expects the same from any future 
revisions that negatively effect El Salvador. End Summary 
 
¶2. (C) As part of the on-going effort to demarcate the 
Honduran-El Salvador border, on November 11 OAS envoy, NIMA 
specialist John Gates, awarded over one square kilometer of 
territory to El Salvador that was originally designated to 
Honduras by the 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
decision.  The territory (Cerro El Pital) is centered around 
Cayaguanca, Ocotepeque and is one of the highest points in 
the area which is considered strategic by both sides. 
According to the GOH, Gates' decision to revise the ICJ's 
ruling was based on his feeling that placing the border 
marker atop El Pital, rather than another hilltop close by, 
made the border more congruous.  The GOH, which was quite 
surprised by the decision, feels that Gates overstepped his 
authority by basing his revision on factors that were outside 
the boundaries of mere "technical discrepancies." 
 
¶3. (C) On November 19 FM Leonidas Rosa Bautista held a press 
conference in which he reiterated that the GOH remains 
committed to moving forward on the border demarcation 
process, even though it felt that Gates' decision was 
unsound.  Rosa also indicated that the GOH had sent notice to 
the OAS stating its displeasure.  Honduras will not, however, 
formally appeal Gates' assessment.  Privately, Rosa told the 
Ambassador on November 21 that completing the border 
demarcation process was among the top priorities at the MFA. 
Rosa stated that completion would eliminate a long standing 
irritant and help foster greater regional integration. 
 
¶4. (C) On November 20, PolOff met with Miguel Tosta Appel, 
President of the Honduran Special El Salvador-Honduras Border 
Demarcation Commission, to discuss Gates' decision.  Appel 
confirmed that Honduras will fully abide by its international 
commitments and obligation to accept Gates' decisions as 
final.  However, he reiterated the GOH's concern that Gates 
over-stepped.  Appel also stressed that the GOH expects El 
Salvador to move forthright on continuing to demarcate the 
border and expressed faith that El Salvador also would accept 
any changes made by Gates in the future that result in 
additional territory for Honduras. 
 
¶5. (C) Appel dismissed comments in the El Salvadoran press 
attributed to Coronel Raul Antonio Sandoval, representative 
of the Ministry of Defense assigned to the Commission, which 
criticized Gates as unrepresentative of the GOH's position. 
The press article was based on a memo COL Sandoval sent to 
the Commission that was subsequently leaked to the press. 
Appel reiterated the GOH's confidence in Gates' 
professionalism (ref A) and stated that the GOH was looking 
forward to moving ahead with the demarcation process as 
planned. Appel went on to say that COL Sandoval "has his own 
agenda." 
 
¶6. (C) Comment:  While certainly not pleased with Gates' 
decision, the GOH is much more concerned with moving the 
process forward as quickly as possible. It is possible the 
GOH may jawbone Gates to soften him up on future decisions, 
especially if the press continues to cover the story in a 
negative fashion.  However, according to the GOH, if El 
Salvador drags its feet in placing any of the other upcoming 
markers that Gates designates, especially if those markers 
result in additional territory for Honduras, or El Salvador 
formally objects to a Gates decision, great harm could come 
to the entire process. Post believes that Honduras will react 
vigorously to any perceived Salvadoran delay on future 
demarcations.  End Comment 
 
Palmer