This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000623 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/BCLTV 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PHUM BM NLD
SUBJECT: THIRTEEN YEARS ON, NLD CALLS ON JUNTA TO HONOR 
1990 ELECTIONS 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary:  At a ceremony honoring the 13th anniversary 
of multiparty elections in Burma, the National League for 
Democracy, which won 392 out of the 485 elected seats, called 
on the regime to honor the election's results.  Citing the 
junta's pledges from the pre- and post-election period that 
it would allow elected representatives to take office, the 
NLD lambasted the State Peace and Development Council for 
failing to honor these commitments.  NLD leader Aung San Suu 
Kyi did not attend the ceremony, as she continued a 
month-long visit to northern Burma.  Despite continuing junta 
harassment of her party and supporters along the route, large 
crowds have greeted her at every stop.  Finally, there were 
new arrests of political activists on May 19, while others 
arrested in February were released.  End Summary 
 
¶2. (SBU)  On May 27, at a crowded and sweltering ceremony at 
NLD headquarters, party representatives called on the SPDC to 
honor the results of multiparty elections held in 1990.  With 
electricity to the building cut off (purposely?), the 
temperature inside soared as well wishers, press, and 
representatives of other political parties crowded in to hear 
the proceedings.  Diplomats from the U.S., UK, Germany, 
France, Japan, and a smattering of UN agencies attended the 
event.  Conspicuously absent were any diplomats from ASEAN 
countries.  Speakers from the NLD and other parties held the 
SPDC to account for its failure to follow through on public 
statements over the years that it would return to the 
barracks and allow the elected officials to govern the 
country.  There were tributes to elected Members of 
Parliament who continue to press for recognition of the 
elections and, as a result, have sacrificed their freedom and 
the well being of their families.  Although 40-50 MPs-elect 
attended the event, a rumored larger turnout of MPs from 
around the country did not materialize. 
 
ASSK Still On the Road 
 
¶3. (U)  NLD leader Aung San Suu Kyi, reportedly in Mandalay 
on her return from a trip to Kachin State, did not attend the 
ceremony.  Her traveling party and citizens hoping to see her 
have been harassed and intimidated at almost every location 
on the trip.  Large crowds of supporters have nonetheless 
turned out, ignoring authorities' threats of retaliation. 
ASSK is expected to return to Rangoon on or about June 2, in 
anticipation of UN Special Envoy Razali's visit from June 
6-10. 
 
New Political Arrests and Releases 
 
¶4. (U)  Three NLD members, including one MP-elect, were 
reportedly arrested in Sagaing Division May 19 for discussing 
rice problems with local farmers.  The three were reportedly 
sentenced to 2 years in prison under a law dealing with 
public disturbances.  The MP-elect, U Win Myint Aung, was the 
first MP-elect since 1998 to receive a prison sentence 
(although many have been detained or put under house arrest). 
 The other two members were officers in the NLD Tabayin 
township office.  We have heard reports that six other NLD 
members may have been arrested in the same township, but no 
additional information is yet available. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  Late-May Foreign radio broadcasts report three 
members of the Arakan League for democracy were released 
April 6 - 12.  On May 20 the SPDC released Sai Nyunt Lwin, 
the Secretary General of the Shan Nationalities League for 
Democracy (SNLD) from Insein prison in Rangoon.  Sai Nyunt 
Lwin was arrested along with several NLD members on February 
8 for allegedly distributing democracy literature and for 
acts against the State.  Sai Nyunt Lwin turned state's 
witness and was not charged, while those he testified against 
received sentences ranging from five years to life.  Sai 
Nyunt Lwin reportedly claimed his testimony did not lead to 
the convictions as the others did not deny the charges 
against them.  He is being reinstated as the SNLD's Secretary 
General.  This episode has soured relations between the NLD 
and the SNLD, Burma's second largest party.  SNLD Chairman 
Hkun Htun Oo was noticeably absent from the May 27 elections 
ceremony at NLD headquarters. 
McMullen