This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000744 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS(FOR JWALLER); SA/PD (FOR LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, 
WREINCKENS); SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY -- EMBASSY COLOMBO EMPLOYEES INDICTED 
ON VISA FRAUD CHARGES 
 
 
¶1. On 5/2 Colombo's Administrative Officer and her husband, 
who had been employed by the mission as a Consular 
Associate, were indicted on visa fraud and alien smuggling 
charges.  PD issued a press release regarding the 
indictments, noting that they were the result of an 11- 
month investigation.  The release also announced that the 
Consulate in Colombo would close temporarily "for a 
thorough review of operations," and concluded by noting 
that "the illegal issuance of U.S. visas is a serious crime 
that threatens American borders and the national security 
of the United States.  The Department of State maintains 
extensive programs to combat vigorously visa fraud and 
investigates all allegations of such criminal activity." 
For full text of the press release see para. 4. 
 
¶2. Sri Lanka's dailies and weekenders gave the story 
prominent coverage.  On 5/3 the front pages included 
headlines such as "Visa scandal rocks U.S. Embassy" (DAILY 
MIRROR, independent English daily), "Visa fraud and alien 
human trafficking -- two former officers of U.S. Embassy 
indicted" (DINAMINA, government-owned Sinhala daily), and 
"Consular section of U.S. Embassy in Colombo closed" 
(THINAKARAN, government-owned Tamil daily).  The 5/4 
weekenders continued with headlines like "Two American 
Officials indicted for issuance of illegal visas" (SUNDAY 
LAKBIMA, independent Sinhala weekender), "Lanka transit 
point for big U.S. visa scam" (SUNDAY TIMES, independent 
English weekender), and "Visa fraud at U.S. Embassy" 
(VIRAKESARI, independent Tamil weekender).  5/3 coverage 
was based on post's press release; by 5/4 wire service and 
local reports had come into play. 
 
¶3. Despite two days of heavy, front-page coverage, only one 
Sri Lankan daily chose to editorialize on the issue.  On 
5/4, under the headline "The visa scandal," the SUNDAY 
ISLAND (independent English weekender) lamented the price 
that "genuine travelers have to pay ... for the actions of 
cheats and frauds" that oblige consular offices to "enforce 
preventive measures" that "mean hardship to honest people." 
It called on consular officers to apply "rules and 
regulations ... justly and humanely," saying that "one way 
of attracting graft is to make getting a visa ... very 
difficult...."  The ISLAND closed its comment by calling 
the incident "an opportunity to blow the whistle.  The 
State Department `maintains extensive programs to combat 
vigorously visa frauds and investigates all allegations of 
such criminal activity,' the embassy said.  Those who have 
benefited from such visas are not likely to squeal.  The 
deprived might, though, now that complaints have been 
implicitly invited." 
 
¶4. Text of Embassy Colombo's 5/2 press release follows: 
 
"Former U.S. embassy employees indicted on visa fraud 
charges 
 
"Two former employees of the U.S. Embassy in Colombo, Sri 
Lanka, A. C. Robert Johnson and Long N. Lee, were indicted 
on Friday, May 2, in the U.S. District Court in Sacramento, 
California, on charges relating to visa fraud and alien 
smuggling.  Seven other individuals also were indicted in 
connection with this case.  No other American staff at the 
Embassy are suspected of involvement. 
 
"These indictments are the result of an 11-month 
investigation conducted by the Diplomatic Security Service, 
the U.S. Embassy in Colombo, the FBI, the U.S. Attorney's 
Office in Sacramento, California, the Department of 
Justice, and Sri Lankan authorities.  Law enforcement 
officials received valuable assistance from the Bureau of 
Consular Affairs in this investigation. 
 
"In order to ensure the integrity of the U.S. visa and the 
visa issuance process, the U.S. Ambassador to Sri Lanka, E. 
Ashley Wills, has decided to close the Consulate 
temporarily to all but emergency services for a thorough 
review of operations.  The Consulate is expected to reopen 
within a few days. 
 
"The illegal issuance of U.S. visas is a serious crime that 
threatens American borders and the national security of the 
United States.   The Department of State maintains 
extensive programs to combat vigorously visa fraud and 
investigates all allegations of such criminal activity. 
 
"As this case is now before the courts, we are not able to 
provide further information at this time." 
 
Wills