This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T KUWAIT 001848 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/NGA, NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL IR
SUBJECT: (S/NF) IRANIAN PROTEST PLANNERS MEET WITH 
DISSIDENT CLERIC 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Richard H. Jones for reasons 1.5 (d) 
and 1.6 (6) 
 
¶1. (S/NF) Poloff spoke with Washington-based American-Iranian 
activist Mark Namdar (strictly protect) on May 3, 2003.  Mr. 
Namdar serves as an unofficial spokesman and intermediary for 
U.S.-based Iranian student movement leader  and political 
asylee Reza Mohajeri-Nejad.   Mr. Namdar claims that the 
Iranian student group Students for Secular Democracy (Jonbesh 
Daneshjooyan) is planning massive protests in Tehran for July 
9 -- the anniversary of the 1999 demonstration and subsequent 
regime crackdown at Tehran University -- to include 
occupation of government ministries.  Mr. Namdar said 
Students for Democracy leaders are expecting up to one 
million protesters. 
 
¶2. (S/NF) Although the group, made up of five separate 
student organizations and headed by formerly imprisoned 
student activist Heshmatallah Tabarzadi, is spearheading the 
demonstrations, Namdar claims the organization has been able 
to gather support from many segments of society, including 
Basij forces and people close to President Mohammad Khatami. 
In addition, Namdar claims Tabarzadi met with Ayatollah 
Hossein Ali Montazeri four to five days ago to discuss how 
Montazeri could be a "key figure in this process."   Namdar 
could not provide any additional details about the meeting. 
 
¶3. (S/NF) Asked why such a wide array of movements would be 
working together, Namdar said that his contacts say people in 
Iran are so frustrated by their current situation that, 
despite political differences, they are willing to join hands 
to try and "overthrow the government."  Namdar added that 
Tabarzadi has contacts within police organizations and has 
managed to convince them to put their weapons down when the 
protests begin.  In addition, he claims that a large number 
of Bazaari merchants have agreed to close their shops and 
join the protests. 
 
¶4. (S/NF) Despite efforts to gather support from all segments 
of Iranian society, Namdar admits the planning efforts are 
chaotic, mostly due to a lack of experience by many of the 
groups involved.  However, he said he is optimistic that 
organizing efforts for the protest are gaining  momentum, and 
he has overcome his initial doubts about the effort.   Namdar 
claims to have already met with VOA and NSC staff, and has an 
appointment to meet with Iran Desk officers this week. 
 
¶5. (S/NF) Comment: While post has not been able to 
independently verify any of Mr. Namdar's claims, we thought 
it best to pass on this information for the record. 
JONES