This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ROME 002956 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE PASS USDA FOR FAS ITP/MACKE AND OFSTS/RICHEY 
STATE PASS USTR 
GENEVA FOR USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/30/2013 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD IT PGOV TBIO UN
SUBJECT: GOI MINISTERS ASSERT SAFETY AND IMPORTANCE OF 
BIOTECH PRODUCTS 
 
Classified By: Economic Minister-Counselor Scott Kilner for reasons 1.5 
 (b) (d) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. At the annual assembly of Assobiotec 
(Italy,s national association of biotechnology companies) 
held in Rome on June 10, 2003, Minister of Productive 
Activities Antonio Marzano and Minister of Health Girolamo 
Sirchia addressed the importance of the sector to Italy,s 
future.  They stressed the safety of biotech and the 
importance of biotechnology to the developing world.  Dr. 
Adriano de Maio, Rector of LUISS University, and Dr. Claudio 
Bordignon, Scientific Director of Fondazione San Raffaele 
described the current plight of biotechnology research and 
development capacity in Italy.  Despite these welcome words, 
there is still no consensus about biotech policy within the 
GOI cabinet, and we are not confident of gaining a policy 
breakthrough in the short term. End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) CDA Skodon delivered opening remarks focusing mainly 
on the US trade dispute with the European Union over the 
moratorium on Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs).  He 
cited the fact that even the Commission recognizes that there 
are no known negative effects on human health and that the 
moratorium prevents developing countries from reaping the 
benefits of innovative agricultural technologies.  In 
addition, he expressed his hope that the Italian Presidency 
of the EU will take the lead to give European consumers the 
right to choose to buy biotech products. 
 
¶3.  (U) Minister of Productive Activities Marzano discussed 
the costs and benefits of biotechnology, citing benefits such 
as new drugs, new vaccines, new therapies, and new diagnostic 
instruments.  He stressed the fact that the drawbacks of 
biotechnology have not been substantiated and are founded on 
political references and anti-American feelings.  He 
emphasized that we face death from starvation in the 
developing world if we turn away from agricultural 
biotechnology.  In addition, Italy and Europe risk becoming 
consumers, rather than producers, of biotechnology research. 
He stressed the need to keep Italian researchers in Italy and 
to attract foreign researchers. 
 
¶4.  (C) Marzano,s remarks were apparently influenced by a 
June 4 internal memo on agricultural biotech from Director 
General for Commercial Agreements Amedeo Teti to Vice 
Minister of Productive Activities (Foreign Trade) Adolfo 
Urso.  Teti,s paper, a copy of which was obtained by the 
Embassy (please strictly protect), reiterates familiar themes 
covered in recent bilateral discussions, including the 
possibility that the U.S. request for WTO consultations on 
the EU moratorium on biotech approvals could spur the GOI to 
adopt a unified position on agricultural biotech.  The flip 
side of a unified policy, according to Teti, would be the 
GOI,s improved ability to manage the issue during its EU 
presidency, especially given the upcoming WTO ministerial 
meeting in Cancun.  He also called for the GOI to work 
towards formulating a U.S.-EU compromise on ag biotech, in 
which a less restrictive EU policy would be matched by U.S. 
support for greater protection of geographic indications 
(though Teti acknowledged continued U.S. opposition to 
expandng GI protections). Teti further advocated greater GOI 
leadership on ag biotech to make Italy compettive with other 
more pro-GMO EU member states. Te expected results would 
include more foreign inestment in the Italian biotech 
sector, and incresed biotech research and development by 
Italian SMEs (which, in contrast to large corporations, 
geerally cannot shift biotech activity to more 
bioech-friendly areas outside of the EU). 
 
5.(U) Miister of Health Sirchia addressed the Assobiotec 
meeting on the lack of evidence of any harm to human health 
of agricultural biotechnology.  He notedthat genetic 
modification has happened naturallyover hundreds of years 
and there is no proof tha genetic modification over 
milliseconds has a diferent effect.  Protective measures 
should only b considered when the evidence could prove 
otherwse. Minister Sirchia also spoke of the importance f 
linking industry to research in universities t make better 
use of the resources allocated to tis sector. 
 
6.(U) Dr. Adriano De Maio and Dr. Cladio Bordignon both 
discussed the more academic apects of the biotech sector 
 
 
stating that there is very little funding for biotech 
research activities in Italy.  A fundamental problem is the 
lack of a concentration of and funding for research 
centers--centers of excellence like the NIH and NSF in the 
U.S.  These centers would, in their opinion, give a 
much-needed focus for biotech research and increase 
efficiency.  The importance of synthesis between academics, 
research, and industry was also highlighted. 
 
7.(C) Embassy comment: On a day when Italian journalists were 
on strike and coverage minimal, the two most pro-biotech 
ministers of the Berlusconi government preached to an 
audience of the converted. In addition, a half-dozen or so 
Italian Parliamentarians and a number of representatives from 
scientific institutions were identified by name.  The 
ministers provided a welcome focus on the impact of 
unreasonable concerns about biotech products on funding for 
biotech research and, as importantly, the sorry state of 
biotechnology companies in Italy, which are near dead last in 
Europe in number and amount of investment capital.  Still, we 
see little evidence that a breakthrough on GOI biotech policy 
is likely due to continued opposition by other members of the 
government, notably Agricultural Minister Alemanno.  We 
therefore hold out no great hope for decisive Italian 
leadership during the upcoming EU Presidency. 
 
8.(U) This cable was prepared by Science Section intern Lisa 
George. 
 
SEMBLER 
Sembler 
NNNN 
	2003ROME02956 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL