This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 000637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
CDR PACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/27/2013 
TAGS: PTER PINS BM
SUBJECT: BOMBINGS IN TACHILEIK 
 
Classified By: COM CMartinez. Reason: 1.5 (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  No one has yet claimed responsibility for 
the bombings in Tachileik on May 21, though the Burmese have 
blamed the Shan State Army (South) and the Thai blame the Wa. 
 The good news is that Thai and Burmese police officers are 
cooperating in the investigation, though it remains to be 
seen whether either side will turn up enough evidence to pin 
the case on the Wa, the Shan, or some other group.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) No one has yet claimed responsibility for four 
bombings which left four people dead (two civilians and two 
police) in the Thai/Burmese border town of Tachileik on May 
¶21.  According to Burmese police, the bombs went off at a 
police station, a gas station, a power plant, and a monument 
to King Bayinnaung, one of Burma's heroes in its wars with 
Thailand.  The Burmese have blamed Yawd Serk's Shan State 
Army (South), while Thai Deputy Prime Minister Chavalit has 
hinted that one faction of the Wa (led by United Wa State 
party Chairman Pauk Yu Chan's youngest brother, Pauk Yu Hwa) 
may be responsible.  However, no one appears to have enough 
hard evidence to pin blame on any particular group. 
 
¶3. (U) The attacks came at the end of a month-long series of 
bombings throughout Burma.  Since April 15, bombings have 
occured on a gas pipeline, in a cinema hall, at an 
archealogical site in Pagan and in Tachileik.  Altogether, 
the attacks have killed five and wounded more than fifty 
civilians.  In addition, the government has outlined about 20 
different incidents involving alleged assaults by Karen 
National Union and Shan State Army (South) troops on 
villagers in Karen and Shan States during the first four 
months of 2003.  These attacks and ambushes killed 33 people 
(including 4 monks) and wounded 42, according to the 
government. 
 
¶4. (U) The KNU has accepted responsibility for the pipeline 
bombings, but has denied involvement in any of the other 
incidents.  According to KNU General Secretary, Pado Man 
Shah, the gas pipeline is a legitimate military target.  The 
Shan State Army (South) has denied responsibility for all the 
attacks and has suggested that some of the attacks on 
villagers may have been carried out by Burmese Army soldiers 
dressed in SSA (South) uniforms. 
 
Comment 
 
¶5. (C) It will likely be some time before hard evidence is 
available to implicate one or another group in these recent 
bombings.  It seems clear, however, that both the SSA (South) 
and the KNU are moving towards unconventional tactics, out of 
desperation or in response to Thai government efforts to 
restrict their activities.  As Chavalit has suggested, 
narcotics may also play a role in the violence.  In any case, 
the good news is that the Burmese and the Thai police forces 
are apparently cooperating in the investigation of the attack 
in Tachileik.  The two sides may reach different conclusions, 
but at least they are sharing information, rather than 
trading accusations, as is usually the case.  End Comment. 
 
¶6. (U) This cable was coordinated with Amembassy Bangkok. 
Martinez