This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 005576 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR NP AND EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/04/2013 
TAGS: KNNP PARM PREL MNUC IR TU IAEA
SUBJECT: IAEA/IRAN: TURKEY RIDING THE COATTAILS OF THE E.U. 
 
REF: STATE 249878 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, reasons 1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) Because higher level GOT disarmament officials were in 
Vienna for the CTBT discussions, PolMilOff delivered reftel 
talking points to the new MFA Head of the Disarmament 
Department Bulent Meric September 4.  Meric said his 
department was still examining the IAEA August 26 report in 
detail, and therefore the GOT had not developed an official 
position for the BOG meeting.  However, emphasizing that his 
thoughts were just preliminary, he noted the IAEA report 
seemed to set forth an ongoing process and did not appear to 
be the final word on this topic.  Furthermore, the report did 
not appear to contain any "technical basis" for a finding of 
non-compliance.  Finally, and probably most telling, Meric 
said that, as a prospective EU member, Turkey would likely 
link its position to that of the EU countries, most of whom 
did not appear inclined to refer a finding a noncompliance to 
the UNSC at this time. 
 
 
¶2. (C) PolMilOff emphasized that Iran was already 
noncompliant even prior to the most recent report and that 
any recent gestures of cooperation with the IAEA inspectors 
emerged only when Iran had been caught lying to or misleading 
the IAEA.  While Turkey's desire to cooperate with the EU was 
certainly understandable, as a neighboring state of Iran, 
Turkey had cause to be particularly concerned by Iran's 
illegitimate activities.  Meric assured PolMilOff that Turkey 
had been underlining to the Iranians at numerous levels the 
importance of compliance with the NPT and of signing the 
Additional Protocol.  Meric agreed that Iranian nuclear 
programs were indisputably disturbing, but the larger 
question was one of strategy.  The GOT was concerned that too 
aggressive an approach would corner the Iranians and trigger 
a negative reaction from Tehran akin to the intransigence of 
North Korea. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Comment: Turkish comments leading up to the September 
BOG are becoming consistent.  While Turkey is concerned about 
Iran's program, it is also worried that too strong a 
statement will cause Iran to cease what little cooperation it 
is currently offering and looking for cover in falling in 
with the EU on this issue.  Embassy will pursue this at 
higher levels before the 8th. 
EDELMAN