This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 001646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
BBG/NI STEWART 
 
 
STATE FOR AF/PD AMIRTHANAYAGAM 
LAGOS FOR PAS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL NI
SUBJECT: VOA SPORTS REPORTING WORKSHOP ON TARGET 
 
Ref: State 242411 
 
 
SUMMARY: U.S. media trainer, Ken Fischer, 
conducted a highly effective two-day "Sports 
Reporting" workshop in Abuja September 8-9.  His 
program made a great impact on Nigerian 
journalists, who learned that accountability, 
transparency and professional journalism can 
contribute to Nigerian democracy.  The 
Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON), an 
umbrella organization for all Nigerian 
broadcasters, said the workshop was  imely nd 
  big challenge o Nigerian journalists as 
Nigeria prepares to host the 8th All Africa games 
in October.  Preparations for the coming event 
have been mired in scandals and scheduling 
problems, which the Nigerian media rarely report. 
Fischer made a strong point on the importance of 
reporters serving the interests of their audience 
as opposed to the prevailing focus on government 
personalities.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2.  DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY: Public Affairs 
Abuja, in collaboration with the Broadcasting 
Organization of Nigeria (BON), organized a two- 
day "Sports Reporting" workshop in Abuja on 
September 8-9, 2003.  U.S. media trainer Ken 
Fisher of the Department of Broadcasting, 
Southern Illinois University, conducted the 
workshop. He taught basic reporting skills, 
including journalism ethics, to a group of 30 
Nigerian sports reporters and editors from 10 
northern states and the Federal Capital 
Territory.  He also provided them with highly 
needed primers on different sports (including 
baseball) that are unfamiliar to most Nigerians. 
BBG  Sandra Stewart recruited Ken Fischer and 
coordinated the Washington preparations for the 
program, including certificates that were issued 
to the 30 participants at the end of the 
workshop. 
 
 
¶3.  JUSTIFICATION AND OBJECTIVE: Nigeria is a 
sports-loving nation, yet poor facilities, 
inadequate training, self censorship and heavy 
government control of the broadcast media hamper 
professional reporting. Nigerian preparations to 
host 23 different sports and athletes from 
throughout the Continent in the 8th All Africa 
games provided an excellent opportunity to help 
sports broadcasters prepare to meet the challenge 
of reporting a complex event spanning nearly 
three weeks.  Normal Nigerian sports reporting 
basically focuses on results of football/soccer 
matches because of football  popularity coupled 
with the reporters limited knowledge of other 
sports. Many journalists lack in-depth reporting 
and interviewing skills.  They have no clear 
understanding of the role of the press in 
ensuring good sports administration.  The 
workshop was requested by the Broadcasting 
Organization of Nigeria (BON) to help Nigerian 
sports reporters overcome these impediments by 
teaching them basic reporting skills and 
providing them with primers on different sports 
other than football/soccer. 
 
 
¶4. MPP UMBRELLA THEME AND AUDIENCE REACHED: NI- 
PD-01 strengthening democracy.  Audience was a 
targeted group of 30 sports reporters and editors 
drawn from mostly government-owned broadcast 
stations located in 10 northern Nigerian states 
and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.  The 
program also impacted officials of the Organizing 
Committee of the 8th All Africa games (COJA) and 
the Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON). 
 
 
¶5. USG SUPPORT: Excellent. Thanks to the superb 
work by Sandra Stewart in selecting Ken Fischer 
to conduct the workshop.  With an excellent 
combination of practical exercises, PowerPoint 
lecture notes and video presentations, Fischer 
was able to capture and retain the complete 
attention of the participants for the two days, 
and in the process taught them how to plan good 
story ideas and how to bring a human touch to 
their reports.  He gave the participants primers 
on different sports, including baseball, and 
exhorted the participants to make their reporting 
better and more professional. 
 
 
¶6. RESULT/IMPACT: Excellent. "The lunch can 
wait," the participants chorused, as lunchtime 
was announced while they took turns practicing 
their newly acquired reporting skills while their 
colleagues critiqued them.  This mood summed up 
the value that the 30 participants placed on the 
workshop.  BON  Chairman, Taiwo Allimi, 
profusely thanked the Voice of America and the 
U.S. Embassy in Nigeria for the opportunity  o 
bring Nigerian sports journalists together at a 
learning table, or the first time in many 
years.  Communications and media manager for the 
8th All Africa games, Fan Ndubuoke, said the 
workshop was on target, and he would like to 
build on the experience.  The reporters described 
their two-day experience with Mr. Fischer 
teaching as  own to earth and 
basic, nd that 
they cannot wait to start applying their newly 
acquired skills in their next assignments. 
 
 
MEECE