This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

011440Z Aug 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 001942 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA, EUR, SA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/01/2013 
TAGS: KISL PREL PHUM NL
SUBJECT: NETHERLANDS: COUNTRY SNAPSHOT FOR POLITICAL ISLAM 
WORKING GROUP 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 205815 
 
     ¶B. THE HAGUE 1603 
     ¶C. TD-314/33365-03 JUN 27 03 
     ¶D. TD-314/02218-03 JAN 16 03 
 
Classified By: A/PolCouns Nathaniel Dean Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) To date, only one political group in the Netherlands 
claims an Islamic political platform (AEL-NL, see A below). 
There are numerous Islamic based organizations and student 
groups, most of which are small in number and influence. 
With the exception of AEL-NL, Islamic organizations are 
normally interested solely in domestic issues that affect 
their members, such as integration and immigration policies, 
and freedom of religion and speech concerns. 
 
Answers below are keyed to ref A questions as appropriate: 
 
¶A.  Arab European League Netherlands (AEL Nederland or AEL-NL) 
-Assessment of AEL-NL per reftel: willing to engage in a 
democratic, pluralistic process but if given full power, 
would not respect the rights of non-Islamists, secularists, 
and/or minorities.  (Note:  There is no/no chance of AEL-NL 
gaining full power in the Netherlands.  End Note.) 
 
-AEL-NL is a young organization that aspires to become a 
political party and activist Islamic movement.  AEL-NL was 
formed in early 2003 as a branch of AEL, a Belgian 
organization. 
 
--Support for AEL Nederland is minimal.  It claims 
approximately 800 members, primarily young second-generation 
Moroccans. Support is centered in metropolitan areas where 
such individuals reside (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague, 
Eindhoven). 
 
--Agenda is domestic in nature, but it maintains a fierce 
anti-Israel stance.  Members must be either Arab or Muslim. 
 
--N/A 
 
--N/A 
 
--While presenting itself as a democratic and moderate 
Islamic party, AEL-NL is viewed locally as an extremist 
group. To date Post is unaware of an active intra-islamic 
debate between AEL-NL and other Islamic groups in country. 
 
--No.  The group does not show any willingness to cooperate 
politically with non-Islamic groups; it strongly opposes such 
interaction. 
 
--AEL-NL is, in general, more anti-Western than anti-American. 
 
¶B.  Islam and Citizenship (Islaam en Burgerschap) (IEB) 
 
--Assessment of Islam and Citizenship per reftel:  Group 
which engages in a democratic, pluralistic process and 
does/would respect the rights of others as well as the 
principles of alternance of government. 
 
--IEB is an umbrella group for Islamic groups (including 
Turkish, Moroccan and Surinamese) in the Netherlands.  IEB 
works as an intermediary between the Dutch government and 
such groups.  Its member organizations are concerned with 
domestic issues. 
 
--In general, the member organizations of this umbrella group 
view the Shari'ah as an elastic body of guidance able to 
evolve to fit contemporary circumstances. 
 
--N/A 
 
--IEB is at the forefront of facilitating intra-islamic 
debate between the Turkish, Moroccan, and Surinamese Islamic 
groups in country. 
 
--Yes. 
 
--IEB and its member organizations work closely with the 
Embassy and are sympathetic to U.S. and western societies. 
 
--Note:  Member groups are comprised of:  Islamic Center 
Netherlands (Islamitisch Centrum Nederland); Islamic 
Foundation Netherlands (Islamitische Stichting Nederland); 
Milli Gorus Northern Netherlands (Milli Gorus Noord 
Nederland); Dutch Islamic Federation (Nederlandse 
Islamitische Federatie); Dutch Muslim Council (Nederlandse 
Moslim Raad);  Foundation for the Promotion of Arabic and 
Turkish Women and Families (St. Promotie door Arabische en 
Turkse Vrouwen en Gezinnen); Foundation of Dutch Muslim Woman 
(St. Nederlandse moslimvrouwen); Turkish Islamic Cultural 
Federation (Turks-Islamitisch Culturele Federatie); Union of 
Moroccan Muslim Organizations in the Netherlands (Unie van 
Marokkaanse Moslim Organisaties in Nederland); Council of 
Mosques (Raad van Moskeeen); Foundation Hague Islamic 
Platform (Stichting Haags Islamitisch Platform); Foundation 
Platform Islamic Organizations Rijmond (Stichting Platform 
Islamitische Organisaties Rijnmond); Brabant Islamic Council 
(Brabantse Islamitische Raad). 
 
¶2.  Post will report any additional information via septel. 
RUSSEL