This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000574 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/21/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PTER PREL CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: TFIZ01:  SANAA EAC MEETINGS MARCH 21 
 
REF: A. SANAA 573 
 
     ¶B. SANAA 570 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened two 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meetings on March 21.  At 
1400, EAC met to assess threat information in light of 
developments with the Iraq contingency and a developing 
demonstration.  At 1830, EAC met to discuss Embassy response 
to the violent demonstration near the Embassy that left 
several demonstrators and security forces dead and injured 
(ref a).  Internal defense measures are in place, including 
standing a 24/7 watch using RSO-directed Embassy elements 
with agreed-upon rules of engagement.  At 1915 Ambassador 
discussed the situation with President Saleh, offering 
condolences and appreciation for security provided, asking 
for further enhancements and suggesting that Saleh might 
issue a public statement urging non-violence.  Saleh is 
convening a security meeting immediately and will respond on 
specific enhancements for security.  More demonstrations are 
expected March 22.  Key offices and personnel represented at 
the meeting included: AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, 
RSO, ORCA, OMC, SOC YEMEN and RMO. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Demonstration Near Embassy Turns Violent 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  A demonstration at Sheraton Circle near the 
Embassy turned violent, leaving several dead (ref a).  By 
1800 local, ROYG and Embassy security called an all clear. 
SOC said Central Security Organization (CSO) reported two 
officers killed and four critically wounded.  DAO sources 
reported three demonstrators killed and 14 injured.  Media 
reports on deaths and injuries vary.  Al Jazeera and Yemeni 
television reported the death of a 12 year old boy during the 
demonstration. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  ORCA reported that the hard-core demonstrators 
who remained to clash with the security forces were in two 
main groups, one with approximately 400 persons and one with 
approximately 250.  ROYG elements reported approximately 800 
in total. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  In response to rumours at 1845, RSO spoke to MOI 
to dispatch CSO forces to deal with an alleged mob of 
demonstrators who had gathered at the Sanaa International 
School (SIS), which is currently closed.  The rumors proved 
unfounded. 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  DAO reported that evening mosque sermons were 
calling for additional protests and stoking the emotions of 
worshippers.  Demonstrators are planning to return to the 
Embassy March 22. 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  The YALI teacher and stringer for Associated 
Press who was detained by military intelligence at the 
demonstration was taken to the Embassy pending a safe time to 
get him home via armored vehicle. 
 
---------------- 
Embassy Response 
---------------- 
 
¶8.  (S/NF)  Internal defense measures were put in place to 
ensure wide security coverage and adequate response.  The 
plan included a floor-by-floor approach by MSG and other 
augmentees for defense of the chancery.  24/7 watchstanding 
began at 1930, with personnel on the roofs of both the 
chancery and the residence.  Rules of Engagement have been 
agreed, to include clear command and control under RSO, 
watchstanders in body armor and armed and use of lethal force 
only with RSO (and COM) direction or in self-defense or in 
defense of American life. 
 
¶9.  (S/NF)  EAC discussed concern that the Sheraton Hotel 
could become a target in future demonstrations, although it 
was not a target at the 3/21 demonstration.  EAC decided not 
to remove to the Embassy the 15-20 Embassy personnel on 
StandFast at the Sheraton.  Rather, they will be moved in 
armored vehicles as soon as the Embassy hears a demonstration 
might be forming anywhere in Sanaa.  Embassy personnel on 
StandFast at their residences and the ACC will remain because 
they live far from the Embassy and are not in high 
concentrations. 
 
¶10.  (S/NF)  EAC suggested another radio message be 
disseminated to provide further information on the 
demonstration and advise them to remain at StandFast. 
 
¶11.  (S/NF)  PAO reported that press guidance is being 
cleared through Washington and that requests were received 
for interviews about the demonstration, which he declined. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
President Saleh Promises Continued Security 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (S/NF)  Ambassador spoke with President Saleh by phone. 
Ambassador offered regret for the Yemenis killed and injured, 
particularly security forces.  He told Saleh that he 
appreciated the protection provided and suggested that 
further enhancements of security measures for Embassy and 
Amcits should be discussed.  Ambassador also suggested it 
would be helpful for President Saleh to make a statement 
discouraging violence and turning efforts towards 
humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people, similar to 
statements made in Morocco and soon in Jordan. 
 
¶13.  (S/NF)  The Presidency phoned again and told the 
Ambassador that Saleh appreciated the Ambassador's points and 
is convening immediately a security meeting to go over 
contingencies.  The President will be in touch with specific 
enhancements. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Other Threats and Security Issues; 
Marib Incident 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (S/NF)  ORCA reported no change in current threat 
information beyond the demonstrations.  ORCA reported on 
ongoing discussions with PSO regarding Iraqis.  EAC discussed 
developments and upcoming actions in the Iraq war and 
worldwide televised demonstrations in regards to their effect 
on the situation in Sanaa. 
 
¶15.  (S)  The list of Americans for the MOI for protection 
continues to be worked. 
 
¶16.  (S/NF)  The investigation into the Marib incident 
continued and no concrete evidence for a motive -- political 
or otherwise -- has been found (ref b).  Because of the 
violent demonstrations, a planned trip by FBI and FPD to 
Marib to join the autopsy of the killer was cancelled. 
HULL