This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ISTANBUL 001356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: PM ERDOGAN CALLS FOR U.S. ACTION AGAINST PKK/KADEK 
 
 
Classified By: Acting Consul General Stuart Smith for reasons 1.5 (b&d) 
 
 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: In a September 12 public speech, Prime 
Minister Tayyip Erdogan called for a leading U.N. role in 
Iraq, Turkish contributions to Iraq's stability and 
reconstruction, and U.S. action against PKK/KADEK.  Without 
attaching any specific pre-conditions, the PM said that 
Turkey is still considering whether to send troops to Iraq. 
End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Speaking at a September 12 dinner hosted by the 
Turkish-American Business Association (a group that includes 
mostly Turkish businesses), Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan 
said that despite occasional disagreements, U.S.-Turkish 
relations are strong and broad-based.  Though anti-Turkish 
lobbies have worked in Washington to undermine these 
relations, he said, Turkey and the U.S. have had close 
political, economic, and security relations for decades and 
will continue to enjoy such relations. 
 
 
¶3. (U) On Iraq, Erdogan noted that the U.S. and Turkey share 
an interest in rebuilding a stable, democratic Iraq and that 
Turkey is already making contributions to that effort.  He 
argued that the United Nations should play a lead role in 
this project, and said that Turkey is still studying whether 
to send Turkish troops to participate in a stabilization 
force.  If necessary, the PM said he would send a bill to 
parliament for its consideration. 
 
 
¶4. (U) On terrorism, Erdogan criticized both the U.S. and the 
West for "not taking the necessary attitude towards KADEK." 
While acknowledging the tragedy that occurred in the U.S. on 
9/11, Erdogan argued that Turkey has also been the victim of 
a terrorist campaign that claimed 40,000 lives.  The U.S. 
should act against PKK/KADEK in the same manner that they 
would expect Turkey to act against terrorists threatening the 
U.S.  If this is done, he added, everything will work out. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: It appears that the PM may have departed from 
his prepared script during his remarks on terrorism and the 
PKK/KADEK.  Many of the 500-plus participants in the dinner 
(who included numerous Turkish businessmen and Turkish 
representatives of U.S. businesses) were taken aback at the 
"harshness" of his comments on that topic.  At the same time, 
they were impressed by Erdogan's grasp of the range of other 
issues in the relationship, as reflected not just in the 
speech but in comments to attendees during the hour plus he 
spent moving from table to table before departing. 
ARNETT