This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SANTO DOMINGO 006906 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/CT (REAP) AND WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER DR
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: 2003 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 301352 
 
¶1.  Summary.  There were no terrorist attacks or known 
terrorism related activities in the GODR during calendar year 
¶2003.  The GODR continues to work closely with the USG in the 
fight on global terrorism.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Embassy Santo Domingo submits the following responses 
keyed to reftel requests. 
 
A)  Significant actions taken by the host governments to 
support the global coalition against terrorism, particularly 
law enforcement actions taken against Al-Qaida operatives, 
but including diplomatic efforts and actions to block 
terrorist assets, enact new counterterrorism laws, and ratify 
existing treaties. 
 
-- The GODR's most significant support to the global 
coalition against terrorism came with the deployment of 
Dominican troops to Iraq.  As a member of the coalition of 
the willing, the GODR sent 302 soldiers to Iraq in August as 
a part of a Spanish led brigade.  The GODR has made a one 
year commitment to keeping its troops in Iraq.  The Dominican 
soldiers currently in Iraq are scheduled to return to the 
Dominican Republic in February and be replaced by a similar 
number of troops for the remainder of the one year commitment. 
 
-- In hosting the 14th Pan American Games, the GODR gained 
first hand knowledge of counterterrorism methods employed to 
secure venues susceptible to international terrorist attacks. 
 This heightened the level of awareness of the threat of 
international terrorism to both the Dominican government and 
the Dominican people. 
 
-- No Al-Qaida operatives have been located within the 
Dominican Republic; therefore, no domestic law enforcement 
actions have been taken against them.  The GODR cooperated 
fully with Embassy Santo Domingo while arresting and 
deporting an individual believed to have ties to 
international terrorism. 
 
-- The GODR has fully cooperated with US and UN requests to 
search their banks for assets held under the names of known 
terrorists.  No accounts of this type have been found.  The 
Superintendent of Banks has been cooperative in heading the 
GODR's effort to ensure that banks searches are conducted in 
a timely manner. 
 
-- The GODR has not enacted comprehensive anti-terrorism 
legislation.  The GODR Armed Forces are in the process of 
developing a draft counterterrorism bill.  The bill is 
expected to be introduced to the Senate or Chamber of 
Deputies in 2004. 
 
B) Describe the response of the judicial system of each 
country to acts of international terrorism and/or significant 
acts of domestic terrorism during 2003, including any host 
government prosecutions relating to terrorism.  Particular 
attention should be given to host government actions 
regarding acts of terrorism against or affecting U.S. 
citizens or facilities. 
 
-- There are no pending cases relating to terrorism in the 
judicial system in the Dominican Republic, nor have there 
been any terrorism related prosecutions during 2003. 
 
C)  Did the host government extradite or request the 
extradition of suspected terrorists for prosecution during 
the year?  Particular attention should be given to host 
government responses to U.S. requests for extradition or 
assistance in terrorist cases. 
 
-- The GODR did not extradite nor request the extradition of 
any suspected terrorists during CY03.  In general, the USG 
and GODR have very good relations on extradition matters.  So 
far this year, the GODR has extradited eight fugitives to the 
US.  The US has returned one fugitive to the Dominican 
Republic.  The GODR has worked with the USG to build cells to 
hold 45 prisoners awaiting extradition.  Additionally, the 
GODR has promised to increase resources in its extradition 
unit within the Attorney General's office. 
 
D)  Describe any significant impediments to host government 
prosecution and/or extradition of suspected terrorists. 
 
-- There is no comprehensive anti-terrorism law in the 
Dominican Republic.  Any prosecution would have to take place 
under existing criminal statutes.  The existing criminal code 
is fairly comprehensive and includes statutes covering many 
terrorism-related crimes such as money laundering, crimes 
against persons, crimes against property, homicide (all 
degrees), and human rights abuses.  The judicial system will 
formally adopt a new criminal procedure code in January 2004. 
 Some portions of the code have gone into effect this year. 
The new procedural code moves the GODR away from a strict 
Napoleonic Code-based criminal procedural system, towards an 
accusatory system. 
 
-- The 1909 extradition treaty between the USG and the GODR 
does not list "terrorism" as an extraditable crime. 
Nevertheless, the treaty contains a comprehensive list of 
crimes under which a request for extradition could be made. 
Additionally, the GODR has honored extradition requests for 
crimes not specifically enumerated in the treaty.  For 
instance, fugitives accused of certain drug related crimes 
have been extradited under the authority of other 
international treaties to which both countries are parties. 
 
-- The USG and the GODR have a high level of cooperation on 
extradition matters. 
E)  Discuss host government responses other than prosecution. 
 These would include, but are not limited to, public 
statements by government officials or official news agencies 
following a terrorist incident (in or outside the country) 
and efforts by host government to investigate terrorist 
incidents or to assist with international terrorism 
investigations. 
 
-- The GODR willingly assists USG agencies in international 
terrorism investigations and international law enforcement 
matters in general.   Hosting the 14th Pan American Games 
this year provided a unique opportunity for the GODR to raise 
the country's level of awareness to the possibility of 
international terrorism.  GODR security force members, both 
military and police, were quoted as saying the GODR was 
prepared for potential terrorist attacks on its soil. (See 
paragraph F, below) 
 
F) Describe major counterterrorism efforts undertaken in 2003 
by the host government, including steps taken in 
international fora. 
 
-- The GODR's troops currently stationed in Iraq received 
counterterrorism training prior to deployment.  A second 
group of soldiers, scheduled to be deployed in February 2004, 
will begin their counterterrorism training in 2003 and finish 
it in 2004.  These sessions are the first counterterrorism 
training received by any GODR military or police troops. 
 
-- Embassy's Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) sponsored a 
number of training programs with counterterrorism components. 
 A group of airport security officers went to Miami to 
receive dogs and canine handlers training.  The training 
focused on the detection of explosive devices.  This unit is 
now operating at Las Americas airport in the Dominican 
Republic.  Additionally, NAS, in conjunction with the 
Department of Justice, sponsored two money laundering 
workshops for prosecutors and law enforcement officers. 
 
-- A small number of military and police officers received 
counterterrorism training and guidance from the USG and 
Israel, prior to the opening of the 14th Pan Am Games in 
Santo Domingo.  The Pan Am Games brought more than 1600 
athletes, trainers and support personnel from western 
hemisphere countries to participate in an Olympic style 
competition over two weeks.  The GODR stated it was in a 
position to handle an international terrorist attack, but 
security throughout the games showed numerous deficiencies. 
Military forces with security responsibilities were not 
appropriately trained or equipped.  Access controls to 
athletic event venues were lax and the physical design and 
structures for the venues failed to provide adequate security 
controls.  There were no serious security breaches or attacks 
during the games. 
 
G) Describe any significant host government support for 
international terrorism, terrorists, or terrorist groups, 
including (but not limited to) political and financial 
support or terrorists or their activities; diplomatic support 
through diplomatic recognition; misuse of the diplomatic 
pouch and other diplomatic privileges to support terrorism; 
provision of sanctuary and/or the presence of offices or 
terrorist groups; provision of training or training sites; 
provision of weapons; and positions taken on terrorism issues 
in international fora. 
 
-- The GODR has not shown any support for international 
terrorism, terrorists or terrorist groups.  The widespread 
acceptance of bribes or favors by officials and security 
forces could leave the Dominican Republic susceptible to 
exploitation by terrorist organizations.  Relatively high 
level government officials and at least one prominent 
congressional representative have been implicated in alien 
smuggling operations and have been tied to other illicit 
activities.  Embassy Santo Domingo is vigilant in efforts to 
detect and report individuals of responsibility engaged in 
suspicious activities. 
 
H) Has the host government made any public statements in 
support of a terrorist-supporting country on a terrorism 
issue? (The seven governments designated as state sponsors of 
terrorism are Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Syria, 
and Sudan.  Please note that, although Iraq remains a 
designated state sponsor, all applicable sanctions have been 
suspended.) 
 
-- The GODR has not made any public statements in support of 
a terrorist-supporting country on a terrorism issue. 
 
I) Describe any significant change since 2002, positive or 
negative, in the host government's attitude toward terrorism, 
international or domestic.  What is responsible for the 
change? 
-- Overall there has been a positive change in the GODR's 
attitude toward combating terrorism during 2003.  The 
government has engaged with the deployment of troops to Iraq 
and with its hosting of the Pan Am Games, gaining a better 
understanding of terrorist threats in both international and 
domestic arenas.  GODR and USG officials have further 
improved screening and reviewing suspect third country 
nationals in the Dominican Republic.  The Foreign Ministry 
has worked with Embassy's Consular Fraud Prevention Unit in 
reviewing suspect visa applications and detecting fraud. 
KUBISKE