This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000154 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/20/2013 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PREL ADCO ADPM YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH YEMEN FM QIRBI: DISCUSSION ON SCUDS, 
DIPLOMATIC POUCH, USAID, CT, AND MILITARY COOPERATION 
 
¶1.  (U)  Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 
1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶2.  (S)  Summary:  On January 19, 2003 Ambassador Hull met 
with Foreign Minister Qirbi at the MFA.  Qirbi has received a 
letter from the Ministry of Defense outlining outstanding 
North Korean military shipments and plans to respond to 
Ambassador's letter this week.  Qirbi also commented on the 
counter-terrorism component of his recent trips to Sudan and 
Tanzania.  The Embassy reiterated concern over problems 
plaguing the receipt of the diplomatic pouch, informed Qirbi 
of the ongoing USAID visit, and expressed approval of Yemeni 
LNOs for CJTF/HOA.  End Summary. 
 
----- 
Scuds 
----- 
 
¶3.  (S)  Ambassador Hull's January 19th meeting with Minister 
Qirbi was also attended by DCM, AdminOff, PolOff (notetaker), 
and Minister Qirbi's Advisor Iryani. 
 
¶4.  (S)  The Ambassador reviewed his recent meeting with 
Defense Minister Aliwa, who stated that a North Korean team 
will travel to Yemen to help with scud installation.  In 
addition, spare parts for artillery and radar have been 
ordered from North Korea.  Aliwa also said the Defense 
Ministry provided input for a letter for Minister Qirbi's 
signature detailing these outstanding arrangements and 
expressing ROYG's commitment that no further SCUDs or other 
military material were on order or in transit from North 
Korea. 
 
¶5.  (S)  Minister Qirbi confirmed that said MOD information 
has arrived in his office, and said he expected to 
incorporate the information into a response to the 
Ambassador's letter within the coming week. Qirbi's response 
letter arrived at the Embassy on January 20th. 
 
---------------- 
Diplomatic Pouch 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  (S)  The Ambassador reiterated concern over continued 
problems with diplomatic pouches.  Qirbi said large shipments 
-- i.e. as many as 10 pouches at once -- would be problematic 
until he discussed pouch guidelines and reached a final 
understanding with PSO Chief Gamesh.  Qirbi stated that he 
would sit down with Gamesh (upon Gamesh's return from the 
U.S.) and seek final ROYG consensus on pouch guidelines.  DCM 
noted recent pouch shipment represented first successful 
"bellyload" of pouches and praised Yemen side for this 
positive step. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
USAID and Potential Development Projects 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (S)  The Ambassador briefed Qirbi on the ongoing USAID 
visit in preparation for the re-establishment of an AID 
office in Yemen.  He noted that the USG is working on a 
strategy and identifying suitable funding sources for further 
development assistance to Yemen.  Qirbi confirmed he is 
sending a letter to Secretary Powell regarding Yemen's 
participation in the Middle East Partnership Initiative and 
the Millenium Challenge Account. 
 
----------------- 
Counter-Terrorism 
----------------- 
 
¶8.  (S)  Minister Qirbi described his recent trip to Sudan 
and Tanzania as a meeting with friends of the anti-terror 
campaign.  When asked about the Sudanese and Tanzanian 
response to this campaign, Qirbi said that it was very 
positive, and added that everyone was aware of the importance 
of cooperation.  Qirbi volunteered that the Sudanese feel the 
U.S. is not as impartial as it should be especially in light 
of its involvement in southern Sudan.  Qirbi stated that the 
Sudanese have reached this conclusion based on U.S. 
legislation penalizing the Sudanese government for its 
activities in the south. 
¶9.  (S)  The Ambassador noted that practical cooperation 
between Yemen and the U.S. on anti-terrorism was going well 
and referred to meetings between Yemeni Ambassador to the 
U.S. al-Hajjri and A/S Burns and S/CT Coordinator Black. 
 
-------------------- 
Military Cooperation 
-------------------- 
 
¶10.  (S)  The Ambassador expressed approval with recent 
developments on the military cooperation front, including the 
Minister of Defense's selection of liaison officers for the 
USS Mt. Whitney, as a practical step. 
 
¶11.  MINIMIZE CONSIDERED. 
 
 
HULL