This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 002429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 1258: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ECON ETRD JO
SUBJECT: Survey of Jordan's Wireless Internet 
 
REF: SECSTATE 85946 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  As per instructions REFTEL, we consulted with 
Jordanian telecom regulatory officials to respond to 
survey questions regarding Wi-Fi regulations in Jordan. 
Follow-up questions can be directed to Greg Garramone, 
Econ Section (GarramoneGG@state.gov).  The responses 
begin para. 2. 
 
¶2.  Jordan has allocated unlicensed radio-frequency 
spectrum for use by Wi-Fi and similar wireless 
technologies, specifically Spread Spectrum in 
frequency bands (2400 - 2483.5 MHz), (5150-5250 MHz) 
and (5725-5850 MHz.  Currently, Jordan allows only 
indoor use of Wi-Fi or similar wireless technologies 
with maximum Effective Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP) 
of 100mw.  According to Telecommunications Regulatory 
Commission (TRC) regulations, devices producing EIRP 
under 10mw need only type approval, usually obtained by 
the vendor.  Sites installing devices producing EIRP in 
excess of 10mw, but less than 100mw, need to obtain a 
usage license in addition to the type approval. 
 
¶3.  Wi-Fi systems can not be used without a license in 
Jordan.  A type license is required for devices 
producing EIRP under 10mw; additionally, a usage 
license is required for devices producing EIRP over 
10mw but under 100mw. 
 
The following requirements must be submitted with the 
application for a usage license: 
 
¶A. A certificate confirming that the system conforms to 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 
standards EN 300 328, EN 300 440, or EN 300 836, or in 
accordance with Federal Communication Commission (FCC) 
Rules Part 15.247 or 15.247(g) or 15.407. 
¶B. Submit a test report that complies with all TRC 
accredited standards. 
¶C. Colored pictures for the equipment from all sides, 
showing the brand, model and type. 
¶D. A complete test report describing the equipment used 
to conduct the test. 
¶E. Written confirmation by the testing laboratory, 
confirming that the equipment is in accordance with 
European safety requirements regarding the emission of 
radial power. 
 
¶3.  Wi-Fi can be used in licensed commercial outlets, 
such as Internet cafes, as long as the location abides 
by the regulations governing the use of Wi-Fi. 
 
¶4.  There are currently no known commercial Wi-Fi 
networks that provide service to the public currently 
operating in Jordan. 
 
¶5.  According to our sources at the Ministry of 
Information and Communications Technology, Wi-Fi is 
currently in use at few five star hotels for guest and 
staff use.  Global One, a subsidiary of Jordan Telecom, 
told us that their offices utilize Wi-Fi, and that 
there are plans to outfit the Queen Alia International 
Airport passenger halls with Wi-Fi for use by 
travelers. 
 
¶6.  Wi-Fi is currently not in use in rural areas in 
Jordan.  MoICT sources told us that plans to connect 
all schools and universities throughout Jordan to the 
Internet are based on fiber optics and wired LAN's and 
WAN's. 
 
 
 
¶7.  There are currently no longer distance (beyond 100 
meters outdoors) Wi-Fi networks in use in-country as Wi- 
Fi usage is limited to indoor facilities for the time 
being. 
 
¶8.  The number of Wi-Fi units sold in Jordan is 
currently not available, but indications are that it is 
low compared to wired network devices. 
 
¶9.  Further information regarding Wi-Fi use and 
licensing is available at the TRC website 
www.trc.gov.jo. 
 
GNEHM