This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 YEREVAN 003087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CACEN; DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL AM
SUBJECT:  HOMOSEXUALS REPORT MINOR IMPROVEMENTS IN 
YEREVAN -- SAME DISCRIMINATION ELSEWHERE 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Despite new legislation that de-criminalized 
homosexuality in Armenia, societal discrimination 
remained an obstacle for homosexuals in 2003.  Members 
of the homosexual community told Emboffs December 24 
that homosexuals continue to face intolerant attitudes 
and severe discrimination in rural areas and in the 
military.  A local human rights NGO said that cases of 
police harassment of homosexuals now involve blackmail 
and extortion more than violence.  Both noted, however, 
that the overall situation had improved and that cases 
of harassment had abated somewhat during the past year 
in Yerevan.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
INTOLERANT ATTITUDES STILL STRONG 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Armenia adopted a new criminal code in August 
2003 that removed Soviet-era provisions criminalizing 
homosexuality.  This move was part of the GOAM's 
response to pending Council of Europe membership 
obligations.  Despite this new legislation, societal 
discrimination remained the major obstacle for 
homosexuals in Armenia.  Armenians openly refer to 
homosexuals as "immoral" people whose behavior 
contradicts "natural Armenian character."  Homosexual 
community members tell us that some politicians and 
local leaders deny that homosexuals live in Armenia. 
They insist that only Diasporan Armenians from the 
United States or Europe frequent the well-known 
homosexual nightclubs in Yerevan. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Members of the homosexual community told 
Emboffs December 24 that these attitudes are most 
serious in rural areas where homosexuals face ridicule 
from family and neighbors.  They said that homosexuals 
in these areas have difficultly finding steady 
employment and must conceal their sexual orientation if 
they want to participate in local government or 
business.  An open, formal homosexual community network 
does not exist in rural areas because of these 
conditions.  Some report, however, that a group of 
homosexuals plans to organize a support group in the 
northern city of Gyumri.  (Note:  Lesbian support 
groups have organized on a national level with some 
success, but maintain a relatively low profile.  These 
groups tell Embassy human rights contacts that they 
face less severe discrimination than do homosexuals but 
that intolerance for their lifestyle is still common. 
End note.) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
HARASSMENT BY POLICE/MILITARY OFFICIALS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Mikail Danielyan, Chairman of the Helsinki 
Association, reported that police officers continue to 
harass homosexuals in Armenia.  (Note:  Danielyan is 
one of the few human rights activists who sees this 
issue as part of his mandate.  End note.)  He reported 
at least three cases in which police attempted to 
blackmail men by threatening to publicly expose them as 
homosexuals to their families and friends.  Danielyan 
said that the nature of police harassment had changed 
during the past year.  Police officers now use less 
violent tactics but pressure homosexuals for 
information about homosexuals, especially married men, 
in high-ranking business or government positions from 
whom they can extort larger amounts of money. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Danielyan said that harassment of homosexuals 
in the military remained a significant problem.  He 
noted that homosexual recruits reportedly face physical 
and psychological abuse by officers and fellow 
soldiers.  Danielyan outlined cases in which homosexual 
soldiers were sent to psychiatric clinics for treatment 
of "sexual perversion."  He said he was unaware of 
public statements by high-ranking military officials 
against homosexuals but that harsh treatment for 
homosexuals was the norm in the military. 
 
---------------------------- 
CONDITIONS BETTER IN YEREVAN 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Young men wanting an openly homosexual 
lifestyle are often forced to move to Yerevan where (as 
our contact notes) conditions for them have improved 
over the last year.  Homosexual community members said 
that police harassment in the city had diminished 
during 2003 and that they do not feel that their lives 
are in danger while in the city.  They said that 
Yerevan's increasingly cosmopolitan social scene now 
allows for more opportunities for expression and 
congregation.  While workplace discrimination remains a 
problem, they claimed that Yerevan offered a range of 
employment possibilities if employers or co-workers 
became hostile toward them.  One well-known member of 
Armenia's homosexual community told us that the 
situation in Yerevan had improved in part due to the 
new legislation but mostly because "people are 
realizing we're not going away anytime soon." 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The lack of formal advocacy organizations 
complicates the already difficult situation that 
homosexuals face in Armenia.  Prominent members of the 
homosexual community say they have not yet discussed 
their lifestyle with family and friends, making them 
reluctant to organize a publicly recognized network. 
It is difficult to gauge official GOAM treatment of 
homosexuals under the law without such a group.  The 
lack of a newsletter or regular meeting continues to 
limit the ability of international organizations to 
intervene or engage the community on a formal level. 
It remains clear, however, that treatment of 
homosexuals is not yet part of the general discussion 
of human rights in Armenia.  Armenia's new legislation 
can only be as effective as the willingness of 
Armenians in and out of the homosexual community to 
engage in a public dialogue on the subject. 
WALKER