This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

250945Z Nov 03UNCLAS RANGOON 001529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
S/CT FOR REAP 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER BM
SUBJECT:  BURMA: 2003 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: A) STATE 301352  B) RANGOON 380 
 
¶1. (SBU) Letters below correspond to questions in ref A, 
para 2. 
 
¶A.  Burma's solid position against international terrorism 
continued in 2003.  Burma has ratified, acceded to, or 
signed six of the twelve international counter-terrorism 
conventions and indicated it is considering fast action on 
at least five more (ref B).  It has conducted in-house 
reviews of obligations and implications of joining several 
others.  The regime previously enacted, but has not yet 
implemented, an anti-money laundering law that could help 
block terrorist assets.  The military government is fighting 
several low-intensity conflicts against ethnic insurgents. 
At least one of these groups is alleged to have ties to 
South Asian extremist (possibly terrorist) elements. 
 
¶B.  The junta has occasionally sought to portray insurgent 
attacks against infrastructure (i.e., bridges and pipelines) 
as terrorism, but there were no known incidents of 
international terrorism per se in Burma during 2003.  On 
March 27 two IEDs were found in Rangoon, one of which 
exploded and killed two municipal workers.  The 
perpetrators' identities and motives are unclear, but the 
junta arrested a number of anti-regime activists on charges 
related to these incidents.  Dozens of IEDs exploded or were 
discovered in various locations throughout Burma during the 
year.  With the exception of two bombings of an oil 
pipeline, claimed by the insurgent Karen National Union, 
there were no claims of responsibility for these acts. 
 
¶C.  No. 
 
¶D.  The regime applies the rule of law sporadically and the 
judiciary is not independent.  There is no extradition 
treaty with the United States, although the rendering of 
suspects to third countries is technically possible. 
 
¶E.  The Burmese cooperate in information sharing on counter- 
terrorism issues. 
 
¶F.  An example of Burma's counter-terrorism cooperation is 
the security presence the regime has provided to seven U.S. 
diplomatic sites, including the chancery, embassy annexes, 
and several residences.  It has maintained the closure of 
Merchant Street, a major municipal artery fronting the 
chancery, at the USG's request and despite the inconvenience 
to the city.  Without that street closure the chancery would 
have no frontal setback. 
 
¶G.  None. 
 
¶H.  No. 
 
¶I.  The Burmese strong anti-terrorism position in 2002 has 
been somewhat muted in 2003, perhaps in reaction to the war 
in Iraq, which the Burmese junta strongly opposed. 
MARTINEZ