This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 002563 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PINR KDEM GT
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS UPDATE: COURT UPHOLDS GERARDI 
SENTENCE; NEW MURDER IN CHICHICASTENANGO 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  The following is an update of significant 
recent developments in human rights in Guatemala.  Topics 
include: 
 
-- Constitutional Court Rejects Defense Request to Annul 
Gerardi Sentence 
 
-- Murder of Community Organizer in Chichicastenango 
 
-- Ovalle Shooters Sentenced to Life 
 
-- Pres. Portillo's Sister Under Investigation for Threats 
 
End Summary. 
 
Court Upholds Gerardi Sentence 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) On October 1 the Constitutional Court denied a 
request from defendants in the Gerardi murder case to annul 
the verdict against them, and ordered the Fourth Court of 
Appeals to resolve the appeals pending in that case.  This 
decision upholds an earlier decision on February 12, 2003, by 
the Supreme Court, and reaffirmed the 30-year sentences for 
ex-military officers Byron Disrael Lima Estrada and Byron 
Miguel Lima Oliva for extrajudicial execution (a third, 
Obdulio Villanueva was murdered in a prison riot in 
February), and the 20-year sentence of Catholic priest Mario 
Orantes Najera for complicity in the murder of Bishop Juan 
Gerardi Conedera in April 1998.  The appeals court may now 
consider pending appeals from Orantes and the Bishop's Office 
of Human Rights.  MINUGUA issued a statement on October 2 
praising the Court's decision and calling on judicial 
authorities to resolve the appeals "in strict accordance with 
the law" and called on the international community to 
continue to monitor the case and push for complete 
clarification of the crime. 
 
Murder of Community Organizer in Chichicastenango 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3.  (U) On September 27, Eusebio Macario, a community 
organizer, was murdered in Chichicastenango municipality, 
Quiche province.  Amilcar Mendez, founder of the indigenous 
rights NGO, Council of Ethnic Communities Runujel Junam ("We 
are all Equal") (CERJ) informed the Embassy of the crime on 
September 29.  He claims that Macario was a founding member 
of CERJ.  According to Angelica Macario, daughter of the 
deceased, Macario had publicly criticized the FRG candidate 
for mayor of Chichicastenango, Jose Tiriquiz Tiniguar, for 
FRG corruption.  According to Amnesty International, Macario 
died from 8 shots in the village of Chulumal, 4 km. from the 
town of Chichicastenango, apparently from a 9mm pistol. 
Amnesty fears the murder may be in reprisal for CERJ's work 
on behalf of victims of Guatemala's internal conflict.  CERJ 
is organizing communities of victims to obtain reparations 
from the Government.  Members of the International Peace 
Brigade are accompanying CERJ leaders Mendez, Tomas Guarcas 
and Ms. Macario, who is a candidate for city councilor for 
the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union party (URNG). 
Eusebio Macario was helping his daughter to organize victims 
of the internal conflict for the National Victims 
Compensation Commission, and on September 21 participated in 
a meeting to inform victims of their right to compensation 
from the Government.  Five days later, three unidentified men 
reportedly asked local residents about the meeting and who 
organized it, according to Amnesty International's Urgent 
Action report on the case issued October 2. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Public Ministry Special Prosecutor for Crimes 
Against Human Rights Workers, Thelma de Lam, took up the case 
on September 29, after we brought it to her attention.  She 
promised to share the results when they are available.  On 
October 1 de Lam told PolOff that Tiriquiz had threatened the 
life of Macario in person three days before the crime took 
place, in the presence of witnesses.  The body may be exhumed 
on October 2, if the autopsy proves incomplete.  De Lam said 
that, contrary to the claims of Mendez and the victim's 
daughter, the victim's wife had told investigators that 
Macario was never a member of CERJ or any other human rights 
group, but instead was a member of the URNG political party. 
She also disputed claims reported to us by Mendez that public 
ministry investigators had not questioned the family of the 
victim as of September 30.  De Lam insists that her 
investigators were on the scene on September 29.  Mendez met 
with de Lam and Attorney General de Leon to discuss the case 
on October 1.  The Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Human Rights 
Center sent letters expressing concern about the case to 
President Portillo and de Leon on the same day. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Comment:  We will closely monitor the results of 
the investigation.  End Comment. 
 
Ovalle Murderers Sentence to Life 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) On September 13, the First Penal Court found Ever 
Lopez Gomez and Billy Rene Barrios guilty of the April 29, 
2002 murder of Guillermo Ovalle, the accountant of the 
Rigoberta Menchu Tum Foundation.  The two were accused of 
killing Ovalle during an assault in a Guatemala City 
restaurant.  One was apprehended carrying a weapon linked to 
the attack. 
President's Sister Under Investigation for Threats 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7.  (U) Press reported on September 23 that Edna Portillo, 
President Portillo's sister, has been called for questioning 
by the Public Ministry about the use of a government vehicle 
assigned for her protection.  The vehicle in question belongs 
to the Presidential Guard (EMP), and was sighted on August 1 
parked for five hours in front of the Forensic Anthropologist 
Institute (FAFG).  The vehicle also followed FAFG members 
when they left their office.  The FAFG has been the subject 
of threats and intimidation for the past two years.  The 
Presidential Spokesman would not comment on the case, which 
he called "a personal matter." 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment:  Government sources claim Edna's son was 
romantically involved with the sister of the FAFG director 
and was upset when she broke off the relationship.  We doubt 
this fully accounts for the two years of mounting threats and 
intimidation of the FAFG.  End Comment. 
HAMILTON