This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS LI SL NI ECOWAS
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: OBASANJO ON LIBERIA: TAYLOR IS FINISHED; 
GON WILLING TO PROVIDE ASYLUM 
 
 
REF: A. ACCRA 1164 
     ¶B. STATE 138730 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR HOWARD F. JETER; REASONS 1.5 (B) 
AND (D). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) In two meetings on other issues during the past 
week, Ambassador raised developments in Liberia with 
President Obasanjo.  Obasanjo said Taylor was "finished" as 
President of Liberia.  Obasanjo said he, Ghanaian President 
Kufuor and others at the Accra talks had leaned hard on 
Taylor to accept a three-stage plan precluding Taylor's 
participation in a transition government that ultimately 
would lead to internationally supervised elections in 
Liberia.  According to Obasanjo, it was this pressure that 
precipitated Taylor's announcement that he would leave 
office. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Notwithstanding Taylor's indictment by the Special 
Court in Sierra Leone, Obasanjo reiterated the GON's 
willingness to offer Taylor asylum if he chooses to leave 
Liberia.  Obasanjo said he was willing to take Taylor in, 
however, "something would have to be done" about the 
indictment. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Ambassador advised Obasanjo that the GON use its 
influence with the LURD to get the insurgents to bridle 
their ambitions and maintain the cease-fire in order to 
avoid a humanitarian catastrophe in Monrovia.  Obasanjo 
replied the U.S. could influence the LURD since he believed 
the U.S. supported and provided military assistance to the 
rebel group.  Ambassador strongly denied USG support for 
the LURD. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) COMMENT: Obasanjo still appears willing to give 
Taylor asylum provided the legal complications arising from 
the Special Court's indictment can be resolved in a manner 
that does not put Nigeria in violation of international 
law.  Taylor has vowed to fight to the end and on this part 
he might be truer to his word than on most other 
commitments he has made.  The GON is convinced that if 
Taylor remains in Liberia this will result in a blood bath 
for innocent Liberians, and a humanitarian catastrophe for 
the region.  Obasanjo believes that Taylor's exile is the 
obvious preferred choice.  Not only is Taylor's fate in the 
balance, the fate of thousands of Monrovians may also be at 
stake.  Exile seems like the most practical solution and, 
as far as we know, Obasanjo's offer is the only one on the 
table.  END COMMENT. 
JETER