This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

061017Z Jun 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KATHMANDU 001049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS AND DS/IP/NEA 
STATE ALSO PLEASE PASS USAID/DCHA/OFDA 
STATE ALSO PLEASE PASS PEACE CORPS HQ 
USAID FOR ANE/AA GORDON WEST AND JIM BEVER 
MANILA FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA 
LONDON FOR POL/RIEDEL 
TREASURY FOR GENERAL COUNSEL/DAUFHAUSER AND DAS JZARATE 
TREASURY ALSO FOR OFAC/RNEWCOMB AND TASK FORCE ON TERRORIST 
FINANCING 
JUSTICE FOR OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL/DLAUFMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINS PTER CASC PGOV NP
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON NEPAL'S MAOIST INSURGENCY, MAY 31-JUNE 6 
 
REFERENCE  (A) KATHMANDU 1033 
 
           (B) KATHMANDU 1032 
           (C) KATHMANDU 0860 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  Amid the controversy sparked by the appointment of a new 
Prime Minister on June 4 (Ref A), progress in peace talks 
remains stalled, with no date being set for the third round. 
A clash between security forces and Maoists on June 3 left 
one insurgent dead. Two Maoist leaders, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, 
alias Prachanda, and Baburam Bhattarai, have called the 
changes in government a tactic by the Government of Nepal 
(GON) to delay peace talks, and lashed out at the United 
States for interfering.  Bhattarai told a vernacular 
newspaper on June 3 that he was skeptical of success in the 
peace talks.  A joint patrol team of police and Royal Nepal 
Army (RNA) personnel arrested several Maoists in Taplejung 
District on June 2.  In defiance of the code of conduct, 
Maoists reportedly have abducted eleven civilians, including 
a school principal, increased extortion campaigns, closed 
down a school for deaf children, and halted the production 
of rice and flour mills.  The GON released nineteen more 
Maoist cadres from custody.  End Summary. 
 
CLASH LEAVES ONE MAOIST DEAD 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  A Maoist cadre was killed on June 3 in the eastern 
district of Ramechhap following a brief clash with Royal 
Nepal Army (RNA) troops.  According to an army spokesman, 
security personnel stationed at the Khimti Hydroelectric 
Project came under attack by a group of twenty armed 
insurgents and returned fire.  On June 4 Maoist cadres 
staged a protest against the RNA in Kathmandu after the RNA 
reportedly refused to release to them the body of their 
fallen comrade.  According to reports, the body was still 
being examined. 
 
PRACHANDA WANTS U.S. OUT OF NEPAL 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  In several polemic press releases, Maoist Supremo Pushpa 
Kamal Dahal (alias Prachanda), accused foreign forces, 
particularly America, of masterminding the change in 
government as an attempt to further their own interests.  In 
a press release on June 5, Prachanda called the latest 
political move regressive, and instigated by foreign forces. 
In an earlier statement issued on June 2 highlighting his 
party's newest manifesto, Prachanda condemned U.S. 
interference in Nepal and called for support to "resist 
American plans to control South Asia," under the slogan of 
"Americans out of Nepal."  Prachanda has issued a flurry of 
statements throughout the week which criticize the purported 
growing influence of the USG on the Government of Nepal 
(GON) (Ref B).  The Maoist Chairman also charged that 
foreign forces had a hand in the refusal of the Royal Nepal 
Army (RNA) to restrict its troops movements to within a five- 
kilometer radius of their barracks (Ref C).  Prachanda 
declared that the Maoists' stance towards the new government 
would be the same as it was towards Former Prime Minister 
Chand's government, and reiterated his party's demand for a 
new constitution. 
 
MAOISTS ACCUSE GON OF DELAY TACTICS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  On June 2 Baburam Bhattarai, head of the Maoist talk 
team, called former Prime Minister Chand's resignation a 
"trick to derail" the peace talks, and voiced speculation 
about their success.  In an interview with a vernacular 
newspaper on June 3, Bhattarai said that foreign forces had 
hindered peace efforts under Chand's government and were 
likely to do the same under the new government. The Maoist 
ideologue also demanded that the agreements reached during 
the second round be implemented immediately, despite the 
change in government. 
 
¶5.  Ram Bahadur Thapa, alias Badal, military chief of the 
Maoists and member of the Maoist negotiating team, also 
lambasted the change in government as a move to derail the 
peace talks, and claimed that foreign influence was behind 
the decision.  Badal, speaking to reporters on May 31, 
warned of "serious consequences" if the peace talks failed, 
and said the current political situation could turn 
explosive. 
 
HYPOCRISY OF MAOISTS CRITICIZED 
------------------------------- 
¶6.  Several recent editorials in local newspapers have 
condemned the hypocrisy of the Maoists.  In one such 
editorial, published in the June 6 edition of The Kathmandu 
Post, the writer flays the Maoists for disrupting the 
education of school children, particularly in highly 
regarded private Christian schools, which have threatened to 
leave Nepal after fifty years of teaching.  The editorial 
highlights the fact that education has been a victim of the 
insurgency, and the insurgents are "ruining the future 
generation of the nation and extinguishing the light of 
education."  Other editorials have criticized senior Maoist 
leaders, particularly Bhattarai and Prachanda, for 
destroying the education system in Nepal, while sending 
their own children to study out of the country. 
 
INSURGENTS CONTINUE TO DEFY CEASEFIRE 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  As senior-level Maoist leaders hurl accusations of 
violating the ceasefire against the GON, their Maoist cadres 
continue to defy it themselves.  In blatant disregard of the 
code of conduct, insurgents abducted four schoolchildren, 
two of whom were girls, on June 3 in Dailekh District.  In 
the same district, the body of a man who had been abducted 
by Maoists was found hanging from a tree on June 4.  The 
insurgents also abducted two civilians from Salyan District 
on May 30, and abducted a school principal and an accountant 
from Sindhuli District on June 3, reportedly for their 
refusal to donate money to the insurgents.  Three civilians 
in Parbat District were abducted by Maoists on May 31 after 
being accused by the insurgents of assaulting one of their 
cadres.  Their whereabouts remain unknown. 
 
¶8.  In the central district of Palpa Maoists reportedly have 
increased extortion campaigns targeting teachers, merchants 
and local villagers.  The insurgents have also stepped up 
demands for food and accommodations, terrorizing those who 
refuse.  Press accounts from that area report that the 
district has become a haven for Maoists, and is avoided even 
by security personnel.  The insurgents forced the closure of 
a rice and flour mill in Hetauda District after the owner 
refused to donate fifty percent of his earnings to the 
Maoists.  In the mid-western district of Jajarkot, the 
insurgents admittedly are on an extortion spree, declaring 
that since the army is allowed to continue patrols, the 
Maoists are allowed to collect "donations" from 
"supporters." 
 
¶9.  Maoists in Myagdi District apparently are ignoring their 
own rhetoric of fighting for access to education for all. 
The insurgents have forced the closure of a school for deaf 
children after claiming the school did not have the Maoists' 
permission to run the program.  Organizers of the program 
have condemned the action as a blatant violation of the 
ceasefire. 
 
STUDENT UNIONS FORCE CLOSURE OF SCHOOLS 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Educational institutions continue to feel the pressure 
of student protests despite numerous concessions made to the 
agitating groups.  A coalition of seven student unions, 
including The All Nepal National Independent Students' Union- 
Revolutionary (ANNISU-R), the Maoist affiliated student 
wing, locked up campuses and universities throughout the 
Kathmandu Valley on June 6.  The students are demanding the 
unconditional release of their imprisoned members, and have 
also called for a nationwide closure of schools.  The 
student unions have threatened to lock all Village 
Development Committee (VDC) offices and administration 
offices indefinitely from June 8 if the students in 
detention are not released.  A meeting scheduled for June 6 
with the Ministry of Education was boycotted by the student 
unions for what they called the unjust arrests of their 
cadres.  ANNISU-R members have already forced government 
schools to return admission fees to students in Nuwakot 
District, but continue to create new demands. 
 
MAOIST PRISONERS RELEASED 
------------------------- 
 
¶11.  As part of the ceasefire agreement, the GON has 
gradually been releasing Maoist cadres from detention. 
Fifteen Maoists were released from jail in Bardia District 
on May 31, and six others released from detention in 
Taplejung and Kapilvastu Districts. 
 
BOGGS