This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000639 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
CDR USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/01/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PREL BM ASSK NLD
SUBJECT: NLD SHUT DOWN; AUNG SAN SUU KYI WHEREABOUTS STILL 
UNKNOWN 
 
REF: RANGOON 636 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez.  Reason: 1.5 (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  The NLD has been effectively shut down in 
Burma.  Its offices have been closed and its senior leaders 
are under detention.  Aung San Suu Kyi has been brought back 
to Rangoon, ostensibly for "her own protection,"  but it is 
not clear yet where she is being held.  Universities, which 
were scheduled to re-open today for the new semester, have 
been kept closed by the government.  Reportedly, a curfew has 
been imposed in Mon Ywa in Sagaing Division in northwest 
Burma, but the situation is quiet in Rangoon, with no signs 
of additional security beyond a few additional MI 
surveillance teams.  End Summary. 
 
Aung San Suu Kyi 
 
¶2. (U) Aung San Suu Kyi has been brought back to Rangoon, but 
it is not clear where she is being held.  Speculation 
suggests that she may be either at Insein Prison, where 
special quarters were built for her during the late 1990s, or 
at the police camp in Htaukyant where NLD Vice Chairman U Tin 
Oo was held during his latest detention in 2000.  No 
diplomats or international press have seen ASSK since she was 
detained "for her own protection" on May 30.  We have been 
able to confirm that NLD Chairman U Aung Shwe and NLD 
spokesman U Lwin are under detention in their homes.  U 
Lwin's daughter told us today that U Lwin saw the Chief of 
Mission, the British Charge' and the Italian and German 
Ambassador's, when they attempted to visit him on June 1, and 
appreciated the visit 
 
NLD Offices 
 
¶3. (U) All NLD state and township offices have been closed 
and sealed throughout Burma.  According to NLD party workers, 
none have been left open.  However, no NLD party workers 
beyond ASSK, the central committee members and those picked 
up in Depeyin have been detained. 
 
NLD Version of Events in Depeyin 
 
¶4. (C) Some NLD party workers have suggested that the riot in 
Depeyin was the result of a pre-planned government ambush. 
Supposedly, the NLD had received notice days before the riot 
that the government planned to stage an attack in Depeyin 
using convicts released from Mandalay Prison.  Reportedly, 
the tactics used by the rioters matched the reports received 
by the NLD. 
 
Universities and Secondary Schools 
 
¶5. (U) Most universities were advised last night that the 
next school semester will start June 16, rather than June 2. 
Today, only the medical colleges were open and operating. 
Secondary schools have also been closed for the month of 
June, though the government has attributed that closure, 
which was announced in late May, to a fear of SARS, rather 
than the recent political events. 
 
Curfews and Marshal law 
 
¶6. (U) Rangoon is quiet.  While military intelligence has put 
some additional surveillance teams on the street, presumably 
to check the public mood, there is no sign of increased 
security.  In the north, a curfew has reportedly been imposed 
in Mon Ywa, though we have not been able to confirm this as 
yet. 
 
Diplomatic Pressure 
 
¶7. (C) We sent a follow-up note to the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs today asking for meetings with the Ministers of 
Foreign Affairs, Home Affairs and Information to discuss the 
incidents in the north and ASSK's detention. (Copies of these 
notes have been faxed to EAP/BCLTV.)  As yet, the Ministry 
has not responded to our requests.  The Japanese Ambassador 
told us that his government had called in the Burmese DCM in 
Tokyo; similarly, the British called in the Burmese 
Ambassador in London. 
¶8. (C) The Japanese Ambassador has asked for meetings with 
Secretary 1, the Foreign Minister and the Home Minister, thus 
 
SIPDIS 
far without success.  The Home Minister, in fact, cancelled 
out of a dinner which the Japanese Ambassador had scheduled 
for June 1.  The Japanese Ambassador indicated that he 
intends to deliver a demarche which makes clear that the 
Japanese government "cannot tolerate" the detention of Aung 
San Suu Kyi and the closure of the NLD offices. 
 
Press Coverage 
 
¶9. (U) The official press has gone quiet on the clashes 
between NLD and regime supporters.  After two days of stories 
regarding the riot in Depeyin, there was nothing in Monday's 
official Burmese press.  However, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs announced late today that it will hold a briefing for 
diplomats tomorrow. 
 
Comment 
 
¶10. (C) The bottom line right now is that the NLD has been 
shut down.  Its offices have been closed and its senior 
leadership, including Aung San Suu Kyi, is under detention. 
The only question is how severe and how extended this new 
bout of repression will be.  So far, all the signs suggest 
that democratic forces in Burma may be in for long, hard 
period ahead.  End Summary. 
Martinez