This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 007685 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2013 
TAGS: ECIN ENRG ETRD IZ PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH FOREIGN MINISTRY RAISES CONCERN ABOUT 
SECURITY FOR TRUCK DELIVERIES TO IRAQ 
 
REF: A. A) ANKARA 7452 
     ¶B. B) ANKARA 07444 
 
 
Classified by Econ Counselor Scot Marciel, for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Akif Ayhan, MFA Head of Department for 
Economics, raised the Ministry's concern about security for 
Turkish truck drivers in Iraq and emphasized that the problem 
could lead to more truckers quitting or even another 
truckers' strike.  Ayhan said U.S. military security for 
truck convoys was very important to the truckers, but they 
are objecting to being ordered to make deliveries to remote 
locations.  (This discussion occurred prior to the events of 
the weekend of December 13-14, which resulted in the death of 
at least one Turkish driver.)  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Akif Ayhan, MFA Economics Department, told Econoff 
December 12 that Turkish truckers bringing goods to Iraq 
continue to complain that they are subject to unacceptable 
risks, and noted that the lack of security was one of the 
reasons for the recent truckers' strike (ref a).  Ayhan added 
that the government is worried,  that unless the truckers' 
concerns are allayed, many may choose to quit the deliveries 
or even organize another strike.  He said that the commitment 
of the 101st in northern Iraq to provide security for the 
trucks was very important and emphasized that truckers 
expected protection along the entire route in and out of 
Iraq.  Ayhan said the government has been working with 
Turkish truckers' associations to explain the situation in 
Iraq and to encourage the drivers to form convoys to make the 
security job easier for the U.S. military escorts. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A growing concern, according to Ayhan, is that 
truckers are frequently ordered to make deliveries to remote 
locations beyond the major tank farms in Mosul, Kirkuk and 
Dohuk, where they cannot be adequately protected.  Ayhan 
urged that this should not be considered the responsibility 
of the Turkish drivers.  Turkish convoys should be required 
to deliver to central depots or tank farms only; final 
delivery to substations of retail outlets should be the 
responsibility of SOMO or domestic companies.  Ayhan 
questioned whether the contracts specified this requirement, 
but added that even if this is clearly in the contracts, 
truckers might refuse to continue deliveries to Iraq if this 
is considered part of the job. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Ayhan added that the GOT was pleased that weekly 
coordination talks have commenced at the border.  He said 
that this is the appropriate venue to discuss implementation 
of recent agreements between Turkey and Iraq.  However, he 
argued that certain issues required the direct control of 
central government authorities.  For example, Iraqi 
authorities at the border impose discretionary fee increases, 
which anger drivers and cause disruptions at the border.  He 
added his hope that expected Iraqis customs legislation would 
clearly settle this issue.  He also objected to the use of 
'Kurdistan' seals by Iraqi border officials. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Econoff raised the continuing delays at Habur Gate 
and said that we expected both sides to live up to their 
commitment as part of the bilateral agreement of December 2 
(ref b) to increase processing to 1,850 trucks per day. 
Ayhan confirmed that Turkey is committed to improving 
processing, adding that Turkey wanted to move forward with 
construction of the second crossing.  He quickly pointed out 
that his government was not making any connection between the 
two issues. 
 
 
¶6.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN