This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000248 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/29/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PINR KJUS GT
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR WEIGHS IN WITH ATTORNEY GENERAL DE LEON 
ON GERARDI AND CHOCON CASES 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 231 
     ¶B. GUATEMALA 207 
 
Classified By: Ambassador John R. Hamilton, for reason 1.5 (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The Ambassador phoned Attorney General Carlos 
de Leon on January 29 to enlist his immediate action on the 
investigation of a recent Gerardi witness murder (Ref A) and 
the protection of the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, 
Tatiana Morales, who has been receiving threats coincidental 
to her involvement in the Chocon case, which is set to go to 
trial on January 30.  De Leon responded that he was 
initiating an investigation into the murder and doing the 
best he could to protect Morales.  The Ambassador thanked him 
for his efforts and for his work on the case involving two 
Peace Corps Volunteers (Ref B).  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Ambassador phoned Attorney General Carlos de Leon 
on January 29 to express concern over the murder of Noe Gomez 
Limon, the brother of a key witness in the high-profile 
murder case of Guatemalan Archbishop Gerardi.  The Ambassador 
noted that human rights and press sources tell us that the 
Public Ministry has yet to open an investigation into his 
murder.  The Ambassador said that he hoped these sources were 
mistaken, but suggested the need for the Public Ministry to 
investigate the murder both vigorously and publicly.  De Leon 
responded that the Public Ministry was indeed investigating 
the murder, but agreed that they should do so more publicly. 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador noted as well that Tatiana Morales, the 
Special Prosecutor for Human Rights Cases, has been receiving 
threats because of her involvement in the Chocon case, which 
is set to go to trial on January 30 in the High Impact Court 
of Chiquimula.  (NOTE: This is the trial of 16 former 
anti-narcotics police who killed two civilians and sought to 
cover it up.)  The Ambassador noted that Morales is 
reportedly unable to communicate effectively from Chiquimula 
with her office and asked that that situation be fixed. 
 
¶4. (C) De Leon said he was on top of the situation, that he 
was providing Morales with an armored vehicle and follow car 
with armed guards for the time she is in Chiquimula, and that 
the National Civilian Police are providing 50 policemen for 
courtroom security and order.  De Leon has just met with the 
President of the Supreme Court, who was concerned about 
threats to one of the three judges in the case.  The judge 
was considering withdrawing from the case.  De Leon (and the 
Supreme Court President, who phoned for the Ambassador later 
on the same subject) said the judge wanted to move his son 
and other immediate family members to the US to be with 
relatives, temporarily.  The Ambassador arranged with the 
Consular Section to assure expeditious consideration of their 
visas. 
 
¶5. (C) The Ambassador also expressed appreciation to De Leon 
for the support (which has, with RSO prodding, been good) the 
Public Ministry has given in the investigation of the assault 
on two Peace Corps Volunteers. 
Hamilton