This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 000213 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV; INL/AAE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV VM CNARC
SUBJECT:  NEW COUNTERNARCOTICS DECREE:  A RAY OF HOPE? 
 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  A new GVN decree may enhance international 
counternarcotics cooperation and offer new hope for the long- 
awaited conclusion of a US-Vietnam Counternarcotics 
Agreement.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
COOPERATION IN PRINCIPLE 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U)  On January 21, Prime Minister Phan Van Khai signed 
a new decree directing the GVN to coordinate with other 
countries in counternarcotics activities, including 
training, information sharing, and law enforcement. 
According to media reports, PM Khai specifically directed 
relevant ministries and other concerned agencies to enhance 
their efforts in entering into bilateral and multilateral 
counternarcotics agreements. 
 
¶3.  (U)  The decree (at least the excerpts that the GVN has 
thus far publicized) is well caveated by usual language on 
the need to "respect Vietnam's independence, sovereignty, 
territorial integrity, and traditional customs."  In 
addition, the decree noted that cooperation "must be based 
on the laws of Vietnam." 
 
------------- 
VIEW FROM MFA 
------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Bui Quan Minh, Senior Officer of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs' Department of International Organizations 
Department (MFA/IO -- the USG's designated point of contact 
for negotiating the long-delayed counternarcotics 
agreement), told poloff on January 27 that the decree was an 
"encouraging step" for enhancing international cooperation. 
He warned, however, that "we will have to proceed cautiously 
to ensure full compliance with Vietnam's laws and 
sovereignty." 
 
-------------------- 
THE VIEW FROM THE UN 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Dr. Doris Buddenberg, UN Office of Drug Control 
(UNODC) Representative, predicted privately that the decree 
would lead to a stronger role for the GVN's Standing Office 
of Drug Control (SODC) as the GVN's focal point for 
interacting with foreign entities on counternarcotics. 
(Note:  SODC is roughly equivalent to the USG's Office of 
National Drug Control Policy.  End note.)  Dr. Buddenberg 
opined that this increased centralization could be "a good 
thing," compared to the previous arrangement whereby several 
ministries had their own channels for international 
cooperation.  Dr. Buddenberg expressed doubt, however, that 
the decree would have a "major impact" on USG efforts to 
conclude the bilateral counternarcotics agreement, since 
that "is firmly in the hands of MFA/IO."  While UNODC is 
reserving final judgment until the full text is made public, 
Dr. Buddenberg commented that the decree, while "helpful," 
appeared "heavily weighed down" with qualifiers that would 
"probably" limit its potential effectiveness. 
 
----------- 
SODC'S VIEW 
----------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  According to SODC Director Colonel Bui Xuan Bien, 
the decree represents one of the "concrete steps" required 
under the GVN's "comprehensive" counternarcotics law that 
was passed in 2000.  He cited an earlier decree that 
designated the Ministry of Labor, Invalids, and Social 
Affairs as the GVN ministry responsible for drug treatment 
as another "concrete" GVN action to implement the drug law. 
Colonel Bien said that other decrees will follow as part of 
the GVN's commitment to move from the general policies 
described in the drug law to more specific implementation 
activities.  Colonel Bien declined to predict how 
specifically the new decree would enhance SODC's role, but 
claimed that SODC "has always supported and will continue to 
support" improved international and regional 
counternarcotics cooperation.  "Vietnam cannot fight drugs 
alone," he admitted.  Colonel Bien opined that the decree 
"is likely to help push forward" the bilateral 
counternarcotics agreement with the U.S., but noted that 
negotiations are "out of SODC's purview," since the GVN had 
designated overall negotiating responsibility to MFA/IO. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7.  (U)  The decree is at the minimum a welcome step in the 
right policy direction, even if caveated with Vietnam's 
normal defensive principles.  While Embassy does not believe 
that its entry into force will lead to any immediate 
breakthroughs in our efforts over the CNA, its existence 
nonetheless offers a new peg on which to urge the MFA/IO to 
get off the stick and intensify efforts to convince other 
ministries (i.e., Finance) to agree to the standard USG 
draft text, and finally turn these long-standing 
negotiations into a win/win situation for both the GVN and 
USG. 
BURGHARDT