This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 001013 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR USAID - DCHA/OFDA 
 
GENEVA FOR UNDRO AND LRCS 
 
USCINCCENT ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC EAID KU
SUBJECT: SITREP NO. 4 
 
REF: KUWAIT 999 
 
¶1. SITREP NO. 4 AS OF 1159 HOURS LOCAL, 0359 HOURS 
WASHINGTON TIME. 
 
¶2. EVENTS SINCE LAST SITREP: 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
Classified Kuwait 1012 reported multiple missile 
launches. Watchstanders and others put on gas masks and 
went to safehaven until all clear announced. No 
chemical/biological agents were detected 
 
--------- 
Military 
--------- 
At 2010 Kuwait Ops Center confirmed to Iraq Task Force 
that several oil wells south of Basara were on fire as 
reported on Fox News and by DOE. 
 
Obtained for US Office of Joint Chiefs of Staff from 
Office of Military Cooperation-Kuwait the name of the 
Kuwaiti equivalent of the Chairman, LTG Fahad Ahmed Al 
Amir, (work 965-484-7400 ext. 60541, mobile 965-984- 
4404). 
--------- 
Political 
--------- 
At 1510, Watchstander called White House Situation Room 
and provided the phone number (965) 563-6222 for a call 
to Foreign Minister Shaykh Sabah at 1720 Kuwait time. 
 
--------- 
Consular 
--------- 
At 1355 Watchstanders spoke to Kuwait Airport Emergency 
Control Center - airport was still operating at this 
time, although some flights had been suspended after 
announcement of incoming missiles from Iraq. 
 
At 2100 CONS circulated a Wardens Message updating the 
American community on the current situation. The Message 
advised that while the Airport remained open, service had 
been severely restricted.  The Message also reminded 
American citizens that visas are required to enter Saudi 
Arabia and that they are not available at the border, 
that travelers will not be allowed to cross without a 
visa, and that women are not allowed to drive in Saudi 
Arabia. 
 
At 2300 hrs CONS Chief spoke with FSO Thomas Rosenberg 
(mobile 966-05-620-6921) from Consulate Dhahran, who has 
arrived in Khafji on the Kuwait/Saudi border with another 
FSO and FSN to assist Americans crossing into Saudi 
Arabia. He reports that everything is calm. Saudi 
authorities have informed him that they are willing to 
issue visas at the border to Americans facing genuine 
emergencies. However, they do not believe that the 
security situation in Kuwait at this time is dire enough 
to initiate a general policy of approving visas at the 
border. Post is unaware of any Americans "stranded" at 
the border. 
 
At 2330 CONS, in response to Department request, 
contacted Kuwait Airways concerning a group of Amcit 
passengers who arrived in Kuwait today from Mumbai and 
had been unable to depart as scheduled for Chicago due to 
the threat of missile attack.  Kuwait Airways has located 
all 51 American passengers at a hotel near the airport. 
Passengers have had to share rooms because of the high 
occupancy rate at all Kuwait hotels. Passengers are 
currently scheduled to leave tomorrow on KU 103 at 1230 
for London, with onward connections still pending. CONS 
spoke to one American passenger who stated that all 
passengers are safe, but frustrated and concerned about 
being in Kuwait at this time. CONS has faxed the latest 
Warden Message to the hotel and asked that it be 
distributed to all American guests. 
 
A total of 23 persons (AMCITS and their family members) 
who have contacted the Embassy to request assistance 
departing Kuwait are still pending departure. 
 
---------- 
Management 
---------- 
TDY FS Health Practitioner Joanne Silva arrived after 
circuitous journey from Miami via London, Frankfurt, 
Dubai, Kuwait to support Health Unit operate extended 
hours, seven days a week. 
 
-------------- 
Pending Issues 
-------------- 
None 
 
¶3. COMMENTS: None 
 
¶4. STATUS OF PENDING REQUESTS: See above. 
 
JONES