This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T THE HAGUE 001548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/ESC/ESP, S/CT, INR/EC, EUR/ERA, EUR/UBI, IO/PHO 
TREASURY FOR AUFHAUSER, ZARATE, MURDEN 
JUSTICE FOR OIA/FRIEDMAN 
FBI FOR LORMEL 
BRUSSELS ALSO FOR LEGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/14/2013 
TAGS: ETTC PTER EUN NL
SUBJECT: TERRORIST FINANCING: ADDITIONAL DUTCH RESPONSE ON 
HAMAS-RELATED DESIGNATION 
 
REF: A. THE HAGUE 1531 
     ¶B. STATE 163613 
 
Classified By: CDA Jess Baily Reason 1.5(b) and (d) 
 
 ¶1.  (S) Dutch officials told us 6/16 that at the EU Foreign 
Ministers Meeting, Dutch FM de Hoop Scheffer plans to stress 
the need for the EU to take urgent action against Hamas 
(including clearinghouse designation), to urge that the EU 
exert influence on Middle East leaders to stop funding for 
Hamas, and to urge the Palestinian Authority devote more 
attention and resources to humanitarian shortfalls that might 
occur if the flow of funds to Hamas were stopped or slowed. 
Dutch officials hope that the outcome will be a European 
Council political declaration calling for the dismantling of 
the "terrorist networks of Hamas."  Dutch Prime Minister 
Balkenende has indicated he is prepared to raise the issue 
before the Council. 
 
¶2.  (S) The officials were not optimistic that the EU would 
be able to formally designate all ref b entities by June 25. 
If no EU member objects to the Dutch proposal, Al Aqsa 
Foundation could be designated on June 23 (note: the Dutch do 
not believe there is a clearinghouse meeting June 23 but 
indicate this is the expiration date for completion of the 
"silence procedure" concerning Al Aqsa Foundation. end note) 
Because designation of Hamas has already been formally 
proposed, Hamas could be added to the EU designation list if 
remaining reserves are lifted.  The Dutch believe that the 
French position will be the primary determinant of whether 
existing reserves are lifted.  However, procedural issues 
will likely (according to the Dutch) prevent the other ref b 
individuals and entities from being quickly designated.  Even 
with a political impulse from the EU Council, for the 
entities to be designated, a member state would have to 
propose clearinghouse designation, an evidenciary file 
(preferably a judicial file) submitted, and sufficient time 
given to all the member states to study the evidence.  If EU 
consideration goes smoothly, the Dutch believe EU designation 
is unlikely to take place before August.  If consideration is 
favorable but not entirely smooth, designation might not take 
place before the Fall. 
 
¶3. (S) In order to facilitate EU designation, the Dutch will 
work to get language into the EU Council declaration 
directing EU bodies to act as quickly as possible in taking 
action against Hamas. They will work to ensure the language 
specifically calls for taking action against the finances of 
Hamas, its leaders, and those that raise funds for it. 
 
¶4.  (S) The Dutch are also considering urging stricter 
control over all funds going into the areas controled by the 
Palestinian authority, including wire transfers. 
SOBEL