This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002096 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR FOR DAS BRADTKE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 1.6X6 
TAGS: UK IZ NL OSCE KINL
SUBJECT: OSCE:  CIO POSITIVE BUT CAUTIOUS ON IRAQ POLICE 
MISSION 
 
REF: SECSTATE 240159 
 
Classified By: DCM Daniel Russel Reason 1.5 (d) 
 
¶1.  This is an action request - please see para 3. 
 
¶2. DCM conveyed reftel points to Daan Everts, the Dutch CiO's 
Personal Representative.  Everts, while agreeing that an 
assessment team is desirable, was unwilling to give a "yes" 
to the proposal in advance of his meeting with FM de Hoop 
Scheffer on August 22.  Everts commented that careful, 
advanced networking is required to ensure success.  To send 
an assessment team outside the OSCE area, it is vital to 
consult key OSCE members (Russia, France, Germany, and 
possibly Italy as EU president) in advance.  Everts opined 
that the Russians, whose support is key, might be likely to 
agree if the request was posed from an anti-terrorism angle. 
Following agreement by key members, an assessment team could 
be ready for travel within a "few weeks."  A senior police 
team member in the OSCE Secretariat would be assigned to pull 
together an appropriate assessment team. 
 
¶3. Action Request:  In order to strengthen the case for an 
assessment team with the FM, Everts asked the U.S. to provide 
additional information by COB Thursday, August 21.  Everts 
asked why the CPA would prefer an OSCE versus bilateral 
police training mission. He also requested further details of 
what the USG has in mind, both in terms of an assessment team 
and the mission. 
 
¶4.  Comment:  Everts is clearly supportive of the idea of an 
OSCE police mission in Iraq and will make a strong case to FM 
de Hoop Scheffer to agree to the assessment mission.  Everts 
is nevertheless concerned that approval by the OSCE for a 
police mission in Iraq will be difficult.  In addition to the 
fact that it will be a large undertaking, he recalled the 
problems in obtaining "Partner for Cooperation" status for 
Afghanistan, another country outside the OSCE area.  End Note. 
SOBEL