P 161336Z SEP 03
FM AMEMBASSY RIYADH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3212
INFO ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L  RIYADH 005821 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER KISL MEPP KPAL SA IZ
SUBJECT: RIYADH GOVERNOR ON ISLAMIC EXTREMISM AND REGIONAL 
CONFLICTS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert W. Jordan for 
reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C)  Summary:  An exceptionally cordial and frank Riyadh 
Governor Prince Salman told the Ambassador on September 16 
that Muslim fanatics were damaging the image of Islam and 
Saudi Arabia and engendering hatred amongst peoples.  He 
acknowledged that preachers who taught hatred of others bore 
some responsibility for terrorist acts, but said there were 
other sources of hatred infecting the minds of people in the 
region, most notably unjust treatment of Palestinians. 
Prince Salman affirmed commitment to the U.S.-Saudi 
relationship, saying that stability and prosperity of the 
region depended on successful U.S. policies.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) During a farewell call on senior ruling family member 
and Governor of Riyadh Province Prince Salman bin Abdulaziz 
Al Saud, the Governor told the Ambassador that he and senior 
Saudi officials were aware of the problem of misuse of 
Islamic charitable funds well before September 11, 2001.  His 
remarks were prompted by the Ambassador's opening observation 
on the good progress our governments are making on the issue 
of terrorism financing.  Prince Salman said that he and other 
senior princes worked in the 90's to bring all the charitable 
organizations under one umbrella because they knew there was 
nothing to ensure that money given in good faith for 
charitable projects went to deserving causes.  While he 
believed that much good was being done by the charities, he 
also had concerns that some money was going to terrorists and 
"maybe even to casinos". 
 
¶3. (C)  Prince Salman condemned those whose "deformed 
actions" had first and foremost damaged Muslims and Arabs. 
The image of Islam and its "beautiful values" had been 
tarnished and feelings of hatred between those of different 
religions were being fanned.  The Governor described how he 
had personally opened a number of Islamic Centers in the 
West, including in the strongly Catholic cities of Rome and 
Madrid, with the participation of Christian and Jewish 
leaders as well as the political leadership of those 
countries.  Such efforts to promote cooperation and 
understanding were being reversed.  Extremists seemed to be 
setting the agenda. 
 
¶4. (C)  The Muslim extremists, called fundamentalists in the 
West, were not fundamentalists but in fact were a phenomenon 
seen before in Islam and in other religions.  Calling the 
extremists "Kharijites", Prince Salman said they were hurting 
the cause of Islam.  (Note:  Kharijites is a loaded 
historical term that can be translated literally as "outlaws" 
but refers directly to the earliest schismatics in Islamic 
history whose principal role in the historical record is the 
fomenting of turmoil and insurrections.  End Note.)  Salman 
said that the followers of Usama bin Ladin were kin to the 
assassins of Rabin and Ghandi and individuals who had 
assassinated American leaders.  The true religious men of 
Saudi Arabia were known for their abhorrence of violence and 
for their refusal to ever lay hands on a weapon. 
 
¶5. (C) The Ambassador commented that those whose religious 
teachings encouraged hatred of others bore some 
responsibility for encouraging terrorists.  Salman agreed and 
said Crown Prince Abdullah was making sure that all religious 
teachers understood that.  There were many other sources of 
hatred as well though he commented.  The current situation in 
the Palestinian territories was causing hatred.  Everyone 
condemned UBL, but wasn't Israeli PM Sharon also sheltering 
and giving encouragement to extremists and hatemongers? 
Salman said he was one of Americans biggest admirers and 
supporters in the Kingdom, but he despaired at the impact 
U.S. actions towards the Palestinian cause was having on the 
U.S. image.  Abu Mazen had resigned as PA Prime Minister when 
it became clear that he was being failed by Israel, by the 
Palestinian Authority, and by the U.S.  Prince Salman said he 
hoped he was wrong but he thought that Abu Ala'a would also 
fail as PM and the U.S. and Israel would have to back to 
Yasser Arafat.  With evident disgust, Salman said that recent 
Israeli and U.S. policies towards Arafat had made him a 
bigger hero than ever. 
 
¶6. (C) Prince Salman said that U.S. actions in Iraq were also 
short-sighted.  He hated Saddam Hussein with a passion, "but 
there was no need for this war".  U.S. actions in 
Afghanistan, Iraq, and Palestine were all melding the public 
perception and the U.S. was being sucked into insoluble 
issues that would damage its interests and the interests of 
its friends in the region.  The Palestinian issue was the 
core issue, Salman argued.  Tackling it would begin to 
extricate the U.S. from the problems it faced in the region. 
He concluded by saying that he sincerely wished for the 
success of President Bush who had inherited difficult 
problems and then been called upon to respond to the events 
of 9/11.  Saudi interests were aligned with U.S. interests 
and success and prosperity for the U.S. meant the same for 
Saudi Arabia. 
 
¶7. (U) Septel reports discussion of child custody cases. 
 
 
Jordan