This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:   DECL: 08-19-13 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS CE ECONOMICS
SUBJECT:  Sri Lanka's Like-Minded Countries Initiative 
 
Ref:  State 231793 
 
(U) Classified by James F. Entwistle, Charge' 
d'Affaires. Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  Per Reftel, Charge' met with Economic 
Reforms Minister Milinda Moragoda on August 18 to 
deliver Reftel points.  In response, Moragoda stressed 
the need for the like-minded countries group to be 
outside of the auspices of the UN, and identified 
several key potential members.  Moragoda seemed quite 
upbeat on the initiative's chances for success, and made 
specific requests for discreet U.S. assistance in 
shaping the group's membership. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) Charge' and poloff met with Minister Moragoda on 
August 18 and made Reftel points.  In response, Moragoda 
stressed the need for the like-minded country initiative 
to be outside of the existing UN or NAM structures and 
to function as a stand-alone entity.  It should be a 
formal grouping, Moragoda said.  According to Moragoda, 
the grouping would take a pragmatic approach and stress 
the importance of results.  Moragoda said any 
announcements would be made from the margins of the UNGA 
in New York, not in Washington. 
 
¶3.  (C) Moragoda stated that Norway and Holland had 
expressed interest in joining the initiative.  Moreover, 
Moragoda said that he had recently discussed the 
initiative with Singaporean Foreign Minister S. 
Jayakumar and with Tommy Koh, both of whom were 
interested yet cautious. Moragoda told the Charge' that 
although he agreed completely with the need to keep U.S. 
"fingerprints" off of the process, it would be very 
helpful if the U.S. could quietly tell the Singaporeans 
that Washington is aware of and endorses the Sri Lankan 
initiatives. 
 
¶4.  (C) Charge' expressed Washington's wholehearted 
enthusiasm for the like-minded countries concept, but 
cautioned Moragoda that to be successful, the grouping 
needed to be perceived as an exclusively Sri Lankan 
initiative.  Moragoda expressed his full understanding 
and said Sri Lanka would take the lead in contacting 
potential members, asking only that the U.S. suggest 
five or six "sure targets" from the expanded list 
previously provided.  Moragoda requested specific U.S. 
assistance in identifying several "credible" African 
countries, and also asked that the U.S. quietly endorse 
the Sri Lankan initiative to Bahrain (along the lines of 
the quiet overture to Singapore mentioned above), since 
Moragoda sees Bahrain as a key Arab participant. 
 
¶5.  (C) Moragoda stressed that the group would most 
likely confine itself initially to two or three agenda 
items -- specifically reform of the Non-Aligned 
Movement, and matters arising from the Doha round of WTO 
talks.  Possible future topics of consideration, 
Moragoda suggested, might include weapons of mass 
destruction in the context of global prevention and 
monitoring methods.  Moragoda commented that discussion 
of Iraq would be unavoidable. 
 
¶6.  (C) Moragoda indicated that a preliminary meeting of 
the group would possibly take place on the margins of 
the UN General Assembly in September.  Moragoda noted 
that he would keep the U.S. abreast of new developments 
in the grouping's structure and possible activities, and 
requested that Washington get back to him as quickly as 
possible on the Singapore and Bahrain overtures and a 
focused "short list" with a few "credible Africans" so 
that an initial meeting could take place in September in 
New York. 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT:  Moragoda remains quite upbeat and 
optimistic on the like-minded countries initiative while 
being pragmatic about the scope of the task.  While he 
had asked for specific items of additional U.S. 
assistance, he is fully on board on the need to keep the 
U.S. out of the front row on this initiative.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
 
ENTWISTLE