This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  VATICAN 004874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE (Levin); OES; IIP/T/ES (Durant); IIP/G/EUR 
(Siemonh); EB (Chase); EB/TPP/ABT/BTT (Malac) 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAGR TBIO VT
SUBJECT: BIOTECH: IIP VISITOR GIDDINGS INFORMS VATICAN 
OFFICIALS, DIPLOMATS 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
1.Embassy hosted Dr. Val Giddings, Vice-President for 
Food and Agriculture at the US Biotechnology Industry 
Organization, for a two-day program of talks and 
presentations with Holy See officials and the Vatican 
diplomatic community in late September.  The Coordinator of 
International Information Programs (IIP) sponsored the 
visit.  Giddings' presentations debunked the popular 
mythology surrounding agricultural biotech and highlighted 
the moral imperative of developing biotech foods, given 
their potential for alleviating famine in developing 
countries. 
 
------------------ 
ONE-ON-ONE CONTACT 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  Giddings' program included one-on-one meetings with key 
Vatican biotech players including officials at the 
Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace, the Holy See's 
Permanent Observer to the FAO and WFP, and the vice- 
president of the Pontifical Council for Life.  Ambassador 
Nicholson hosted a working lunch where Giddings met with 
scientists, Italian agricultural specialists and Vatican 
officials to discuss biotech issues.  These meetings 
reinforced our effort to expand understanding among key 
Vatican decision makers and to resolve some of their 
outstanding concerns. 
 
--------------- 
PUBLIC OUTREACH 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  At a public lecture at the prestigious Regina 
Apostolorum Pontifical University, Giddings addressed 
common misconceptions on biotech and the moral aspects of 
the question.  Following the speech and a question and 
answer period, Giddings spoke to journalists from the 
Regina Apostolorum newsletter and ANSA, the principal 
Italian news agency, about the many biotech "myths" 
circulating in Europe.  Additionally, Vatican Radio 
interviewed Giddings about the scientific and moral/ethical 
aspects of biotechnology.  His comments were broadcast to 
an international audience with millions of potential 
listeners.  The interview was later available on Vatican 
Radio's web site. 
 
---------------------------- 
WORKING THE DIPLOMATIC CORPS 
---------------------------- 
 
4.Central to Giddings' visit was an extremely successful 
round-table hosted by the Ambassador with diplomats 
accredited to the Holy See and selected representatives of 
the Holy See.  Giddings reviewed key issues surrounding 
biotechnology and refuted specious anti-biotech arguments 
proffered by some in the group.  Some 30 ambassadors 
accredited to the Vatican attended the session in a crowd 
of nearly 40 diplomatic personnel.  At the request of 
attendees, Embassy provided additional reading material on 
biotech issues, and a copy of Giddings power point 
presentation to interested embassies following the event. 
Ambassadors from Israel, Canada, Greece and Germany emerged 
as allies for biotech promotion at the Holy See. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
COMMENT: VISIT SET STAGE FOR VATICAN CONFERENCE, AND MORE 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
5.The Holy See's Council for Justice and Peace will host 
an international meeting in Vatican City in mid-November to 
consider the science, ethics and moral implications of 
biotechnology (reftels).  Giddings' visit helped set the 
stage for the Vatican conference, providing useful 
background and ammunition for those open to the development 
of biotech foods, and challenging the naysayers, as well as 
framing the issue for the wider Vatican community.  Our 
outreach to the diplomatic corps has proven especially 
important as other missions have begun to join us in 
pressing the Holy See on the issue and could help influence 
their capitals by linking the scientific and moral 
arguments regarding biotech foods.  Giddings' visit 
advanced an ongoing effort to build the moral case for 
biotech to a Vatican and diplomatic audience attuned to 
moral issues. 
E 
 
 
¶6.  Embassy thanks IIP for providing the funding and 
support for Giddings' visit.  Such outreach is key to 
winning over the Vatican to the potential of biotechnology 
in combating hunger and disease; and protecting the 
environment, especially in the developing world. 
 
Nicholson 
 
 
NNNN 
 

 2003VATICA04874 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED