This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RANGOON 000900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EAP/PD (KOVACH), IIP/G/IR (BORYS), IIP/G/EAP 
(HOLDEN), IIP/T/CP (CLACK) 
INFO R (KFOSTER), BCLTV (GLAZEROFF) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OIIP KDEM PGOV BM
SUBJECT: BURNING FOR BOOKS IN BURMA: HIGH SUCCESS 
WITH LOW TECH 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  American Center publications and 
library programs are currently enjoying new highs of 
popularity.  The military government of Burma 
censors the press, dictates radio and television 
broadcasts, limits access to the internet, and 
controls every educational institution across Burma, 
creating a hunger for unbiased and free information. 
Public Affairs Rangoon's strategy to promote 
American values relies on old-school information 
delivery techniques:  paper products in the form of 
books, magazines, and pamphlets.  Despite lean 
economic times and less disposable family income for 
most Burmese, the past months have seen a steady 
increase in new library memberships and in 
subscriptions to post publications.  While the trend 
predates the May 30 ambush of democracy leaders, PAS 
experienced a large uptick in attendance in June 
when populations were particularly hungry for 
uncensored information from abroad about events in 
their own country. End summary. 
 
LINING UP FOR LIBRARY CARDS 
------- 
¶2. During the month of June, Four hundred and fifty 
new members enrolled in the Library/IRC and 6,724 
patrons walked through its doors and checked out 
4,108 books, cassettes, and videotapes.  The 
Library's patrons are overwhelmingly young adults. 
Nearly 60 percent of those visiting in June were 
university students.  Another 25 percent were 
students of English and high school graduates 
waiting for places to open at Rangoon's 
universities.  The remaining patrons included 
medical doctors, government bureaucrats, teachers, 
lawyers, and other professionals. 
 
¶3. Public and university libraries are only poorly 
stocked and maintained.  Government restrictions 
limit content and little funding means most books 
are dated, if not worm-eaten.  Only the libraries 
run by the American Center and the British Council 
offer anything close to a modern, comprehensive 
library.  Even with the American Center's modest 
collection of 8,000 volumes and 70 periodicals, the 
demand for our services is strong and continues to 
rise.  At just 500 kyat (about 50 cents) a year, 
most any Burmese can afford to join the American 
Center Library.  New memberships have averaged 370 a 
month, and are climbing, since December 2002.  One 
recent Saturday in July, 173 new members joined. 
The Library now has nearly 11,000 active members. 
 
¶4. The demand for library services is not limited to 
Burmese living in Rangoon.  Just prior to the May 30 
crackdown on democracy activists, the American 
Center Library went on the road to participate for 
the first time in the book fairs of two universities 
outside of Rangoon, the Bago Degree College and Pyay 
University.  The universities were enthusiastic 
about collaboration with the American Center.  They 
assisted us in gaining permission from the Ministry 
of Education and the Ministry of Information to 
display our books on their campuses and even 
rescheduled their fairs for our benefit when the 
Ministry of Information delayed granting approval. 
(The Ministry granted its permission after 
physically inspecting all sixty books intended for 
our display.) 
 
¶5. At the book fairs, the American Center displayed 
about 60 titles covering environmental science, 
globalization, HIV/AIDS, and drug abuse.  Professors 
and students alike browsed our traveling collection, 
some stopping to read intently.  Many teachers wrote 
down the titles and authors and requested IRC 
assistance in acquiring these books for use in their 
courses.  Good dictionaries and titles on the 
environment were in particular demand on both 
campuses. 
 
¶6. We took the rare opportunity of being on campus 
to distribute free copies of post produced 
publications.  At Pyay, pandemonium ensued when word 
spread that the American Center was giving books 
away, and the line to receive them soon snaked out 
the door of the exhibit hall.  In total, more than 
1,800 copies of American Center produced magazines 
were distributed along with nearly 1,000 books from 
the American Center book translation program. 
Titles distributed included "Democracy in America" 
by De Tocqueville, "My American Journey" by Colin 
Powell, and other biographies and works of fiction. 
 
¶7. Bago Degree College has about 1500 full time 
students while another 10,000 attend as distance- 
learners.  All are undergraduate students.  Pyay 
University boasts a student population of roughly 
5,000 (of which three quarters are undergraduate 
students) with another 20,000 enrolled in their 
distance learning courses.  The DPAO and the 
American Center Library team, accompanied by the 
Bangkok Regional Librarian Officer, feel confident 
they greeted a high percentage of both student 
bodies.  Both Bago Degree College and Pyay 
University invited American Center participation in 
their 2004 book fairs. 
 
¶B.  NEW LOOK, NEW APPEAL FOR PERIODICALS 
------ 
¶8. Following a makeover and a subscription drive 
that closed recently, paid subscriptions to post- 
produced publications in English and Burmese (see 
para 10) rose more than 27 percent over last year. 
(A total of 24,200 subscriptions in 2003, over 
19,013 subscriptions for 2002.)  Our press and 
publications staff injected a more vital feel to our 
venerable publications, with more articles meant to 
appeal to youth and the use of vibrant colors and 
tag lines to make features stand out.  In addition 
to increased subscriptions, positive reader feedback 
has also surged. 
 
¶9. The American Center's printing press publishes 
over 700,000 pages of material every month. 
Contractors translate some materials, exchange 
participants and other Center contacts write 
original articles, and American Center staff edits 
the whole.  Then in-house staff, led by a 
professional graphic artist, designs each 
publication, does the camera work, plate-making, and 
four color printing.  By running a printing press 
inhouse, PAS eliminates one avenue of pressure the 
Burmese government could use to delay our 
publications. 
 
¶10. Description of periodical publications: 
 
a. American News & Views (circulation:  fewer than 
100) is the Post's daily newsletter, based entirely 
on Washington File's EPF section.  It is edited in- 
house for substance and clarity.  ANV is aimed at 
laying the groundwork for future media placement. 
By limiting distribution to fewer than 100, the 
American Center may circumvent the Press Scrutiny 
Board (government censor board) review of content. 
 
b. News & Features USA (circulation:  6,975) is a 
biweekly containing backgrounders from the 
Washington File, Electronic Journals, etc. 
 
c. American Mosaic (circulation:  8,757) is a 
monthly publication containing articles from the VOA 
Special English program.  Written in simple English, 
the publication is targeted to young Burmese 
students of English. 
 
d. Lin Yaung Chi USA (circulation:  8,468) is a 
bimonthly Burmese-language publication providing 
information and knowledge about various aspects of 
the United States. Targeted readers are the general 
Burmese public. 
 
e. Enduring Freedom (circulation: 10,000) a monthly 
Burmese-language publication published in support of 
the global war on terrorism.  It is distributed free 
at the IRC, as an insert in other publications and 
by embassy personnel.  Entire issues have been 
reprinted in the progressive bimonthly journal, 
Light of Islam (circulation 6,000).  In the months 
following September 11, 2001, the newsletter was 
published monthly.  Leading up to and during the 
recent conflict in Iraq, EF was published weekly. 
One entire issue of Enduring Freedom detailed Saddam 
Hussein's crimes against the Iraqi people. 
 
¶11. PAS Rangoon also runs an active book translation 
program.  In FY 2002, two books were translated into 
Burmese:  Katherine Graham's "Personal History" and 
Secretary Powell's "My American Journey."  The 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretary's autobiography passed the censor board in 
 
SIPDIS 
record time and was a swift seller, popular with 
both democratic opposition and military government 
types. (The embassy hopes it conveyed positive 
images of healthy military-civilian relations and 
roles, but has yet to see any manifestation of such 
influence in the Burmese military rulers.)  Thomas 
Friedman's "The Lexus and the Olive Tree" will head 
to press in September and Paul Krugman's "The 
Accidental Theorist" in December. Henry Hazlitt's 
"Economics in One Lesson" is already in process for 
2004 publication. 
 
¶C. SATISFYING THE HUNGER BEYOND RANGOON 
------ 
¶12. Comment:  There is a hunger for information 
across Burma.  Because the media is not free and the 
education system is failing, many people look to the 
American Center to help fill in gaps created by the 
regime.  The crowds visiting the American Center in 
Rangoon daily testify to that.  And whenever 
American Center staff are able to travel, we see 
firsthand the hunger for information and contact in 
places like Pyay or Bago or Mandalay.  Although a 
particularly conservative military commander governs 
the second largest city, Mandalay, the people of 
that city come to our programs in larger than 
expected numbers. 
 
¶13.  In their own effort to extend beyond the 
capital, the British Council made a one-time 
endowment with year 2000 funds to create ten 
Millennium Centers (similar to our American Corners 
concept but focused exclusively on English language 
education) housed at community civil society 
organizations -- often the local YMCA or a church- 
based learning center -- in secondary cities across 
the country.  The British Council also opened a 
satellite office/reading room in Mandalay.  The 
American Center actively supports the Millenium 
Centers with English teaching materials donations 
and by conducting English teacher training courses 
for their personnel. 
 
¶14. In a country where the communication 
infrastructure is archaic and the government 
controls the media, the American Center relies on 
tried and true public diplomacy tools.  In other 
countries, what Edward R. Murrow called "the last 
three feet" might be closed by a modem or by a 
televised interview.  But not in Burma.  In Burma, 
"old-school" brick and mortar and "low-tech" paper 
and ink consistently reach our hungry young audience 
with a high degree of success.  Only with more of 
each will we reach farther.  End Comment.  MCMULLEN