This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161312Z Oct 03S E C R E T  ROME 004736 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR EUR, EUR/WE, EUR/RPM, PM 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/14/2023 
TAGS: PREL MOPS IT FORCES IN ITALY
SUBJECT: ITALY: FACTORS AFFECTING BASING OF U.S. MILITARY 
FORCES 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Emil Skodon, 1.5 B and D. 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
¶1. (S/NF) US military forces in Italy, which are present 
under NATO auspices and operate on Italian (not US) bases, 
are generally welcome, and we expect that situation to 
continue.  In return for basing access, Italy expects a 
spirit of partnership, timely consultation, and full respect 
for Italian sovereignty.  In general, US operations under 
NATO or UN auspices gain swift political approval; requests 
for unilateral US operations from Italian bases are more 
complex, and could be denied depending upon the Italian 
political context.  Changes in US basing posture in Italy are 
generally acceptable, if founded on sound military and/or 
economic principles, balanced, and consistent with the NATO 
umbrella under which our forces operate in Italy.  Issues 
related to specific locations of US forces can be more 
difficult and subject to extensive discussion, although we 
generally get to yes.  The Berlusconi government offers a 
unique opportunity to finalize basing agreements (TAs) under 
the 1995 Shell Agreement; it is in USG interest to nail these 
down without further delay.  End summary. 
 
 
US Forces are welcome in Italy... 
 
 
¶2. (S/NF) The US has a long and positive history of basing 
military forces in Italy, and this situation is accepted as 
normal by most Italians.  Approximately 15,000 US soldiers, 
sailors, airmen and Marines are stationed in Italy at eight 
major installations.  There are, however, no US bases per se 
in Italy; all US forces are present under NATO auspices on 
Italian repeat Italian bases.  US military forces are 
generally &good guests8, maintaining high professional 
standards and hewing to environmental, safety, and other 
standards that often surpass those required locally.  While 
much attention today is focused on our excellent bilateral 
relations with PM Berlusconi,s center-right government, its 
center-left predecessors were also generally receptive to the 
presence of US forces in Italy.  This long history has paid 
dividends:  Italian communities often feel a vested interest 
in &their8 local bases, and the US and Italian militaries 
generally work together closely at these facilities. 
 
 
... in return for consultation, partnership, and respect for 
sovereignty 
 
 
¶3. (S/NF) In the period after the Cold War, Italy has sought 
a more mature relationship with the US, stressing partnership 
and early consultation on issues of mutual concern.  This is 
especially true on matters related to the presence and 
activities of US military forces in Italy.  The 1998 Cavalese 
tragedy, in which 20 persons died when a US military aircraft 
severed a ski gondola cable, brought these concerns to the 
fore, and they have never been far from the surface in 
subsequent years.  One of the reasons for this vigilance is 
the fact that Italian military and civilian officials can be 
(and have been) held both civilly and criminally liable for 
lapses or misjudgments that involve US forces and occur 
during the course of those officials, duties.  The bottom 
line is that Italian authorities now inquire with far greater 
frequency and specificity about US military activities in 
Italy, expect to be briefed fully and, failing that, are not 
beyond denying the US permission to operate. 
 
NATO Operations v. Unilateral Operations 
 
 
¶4. (S/NF) Since US forces in Italy are present under NATO 
auspices, Italian governments are quick to provide full 
support for Alliance operations, even when public and 
political support for a specific operation (e.g., Kosovo) 
might be weak.  The same is generally true for missions 
carried out pursuant to UN authorization, and would likely be 
the same for a Berlin Plus operation involving NATO support 
for an EU lead.  When a proposed operation involving Italian 
territory lacks a multilateral imprimatur, Italy,s response 
will generally be based on an ad hoc set of factors, 
according to political exigencies and the government of the 
day.  The deployment of the 173rd Airborne Brigade to 
northern Iraq during OIF was politically complicated for this 
reason.  Although Berlusconi,s government was as good as its 
word and facilitated the deployment, the decision was 
politically difficult, and a center-left government might 
well have come out the other way. 
 
¶5. (S/NF) US planners should carefully consider the likely 
missions of US military personnel -- and likely stances of 
Italian officials -- before making final decisions to seek 
basing for them in Italy.  For example, proposed basing of 
U-2 aircraft in Sicily for operations in the Middle East led 
to extensive (albeit ultimately successful) negotiations, 
even though the U-2 operations were flown in support of the 
Camp David accords.  Special operations forces in Italy could 
pose particularly difficult issues because of their need to 
meet unilateral requirements rapidly.  When the possibility 
of basing SOF was raised with Italy over a decade ago, its 
reaction was cool.  If SOF were based in Italy, their ability 
to operate freely would not, in our view, be guaranteed. 
 
 
Basing changes are acceptable, in general... 
 
 
¶6. (S/NF) Italian political and military leaders have a 
sophisticated understanding of the US, and generally endorse 
steps to make our military forces more efficient and better 
positioned.  They accepted limited NATO restructuring, even 
when it "cost" Italy (i.e., AirSouth).  Likewise, they will 
grumble little at the macro level about repositioning of US 
forces presently in Italy, so long as such changes make 
military and economic sense and there is no perception of 
Italy -- whose government supported OEF and OIF in the face 
of strong opposition from the center-left and public opinion 
-- being singled out for adverse treatment. 
 
 
.. but scrutinized for local impact 
 
 
¶7. (S/NF) Since all politics ) including Italian politics ) 
is local, the views of both local communities and national 
authorities are important in considering specific basing 
changes.  Generally speaking, Italy favors basing US forces 
south and east, for both political and economic reasons. 
Most importantly, Italy,s political and military leaders 
expect us to consult with ) and listen to ) them on 
proposed basing changes. 
 
¶8. (S/NF) In 2000, the Italian government was initially cool 
to our proposal to augment SETAF (Vicenza) with additional 
troops, pointing out that the Veneto area has high population 
density, low unemployment, and a highly stressed 
 
 
infrastructure, and that a &better8 alternative (Camp 
Darby) existed.  In the end, we gained approval only when we 
promised not to exceed previously-agreed personnel numbers 
and to seek no expansion of existing facilities (i.e., build 
up and not out).  Improvements to the sub tending operation 
at Santo Stefano/La Maddalena offer an equally challenging 
set of issues, since it is located in a marine nature 
preserve and uses over two dozen sites.  Closure of Gaeta, 
currently home port for the Sixth Fleet flagship, while 
locally significant, might cause relatively few ripples on 
the national level. 
 
¶9. (S/NF) Italy's insistence on timely consultation is not 
new.  US requests in the late 80's to relocate the 401st 
Tactical Fighter Wing from Torrejon AFB to a specific site in 
Italy met with resistance; Italy insisted that we first 
conduct site surveys on three other locations.  Examples 
abound, but the rule is simple:  consult early and often with 
local and national authorities about proposed changes in 
basing footprints and, when possible, take on board their 
concerns. 
 
 
Berlusconi's government:  a unique opportunity to lock in 
basing agreements 
 
 
¶10. (S/NF) The 1995 Shell Agreement provides for the 
establishment of technical agreements (TAs) for each base 
with US forces.  After almost two years of negotiations, no 
TAs under the Shell have been finalized, even though the 
bilateral Joint Military Commission continues to work 
intensively on the issue.  Most issues are resolved, but one 
sticking point involves differing views by US military 
services on legal and financial issues.  Embassy Rome is 
agnostic on how these differences are resolved, but urges in 
strongest terms that they be resolved as soon as possible. 
As noted earlier, the Berlusconi government provides an 
unprecedented opportunity to work with the Italians.   We do 
not foresee any successor government offering more favorable 
terms for TAs.   Given that elections will be held in Spring 
2006, or possibly earlier, we need to accelerate progress on 
all TAs, including the Sigonella TA, if we want to secure the 
best possible terms for the US military.   We recommend that 
the USG lock in these provisions without further delay. 
Failure to do so could erode our operational capabilities in 
Italy. 
SEMBLER 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME04736 - Classification: SECRET