This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV VM KIRF ETMIN HUMANR RELFREE
SUBJECT: INVITATIONS TO "DISCUSS" RELIGION IN DAK LAK PROVINCE 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  On May 29, ConGen Poloff and Pol/Econ assistant met 
with a reliable contact regarding the situation of unregistered 
religious minority groups in Dak Lak province.  The contact 
gave ConGenoff a collection of written materials -- some 
official-looking original documents and several photocopied 
"invitations" from district and commune police offices in Dak 
Lak.  There were also photocopies of "invitations" from a local 
Fatherland Front Committee.  The invitations ask the 
individuals to meet with officials to discuss GVN policy on 
religious affairs.  According to our contact, however, during 
these meetings each individual was asked to sign a document 
saying s/he would disband the unrecognized church council to 
which they belonged.  The documents originate in either Krong 
No District or Truong Xuan Commune (Dak Song District).  Poloff 
was unable to verify the authenticity of these documents but 
has no reason to doubt the source's sincerity. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Post's contact indicated that the invitations were 
given to individuals he personally knew in Dak Lak province. 
He received the documents from the pastors to whose 
congregations these individuals belong -- with the agreement to 
protect the information and bring it to the USG and other 
groups concerned about the treatment of unrecognized religious 
minorities in the Central Highlands. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The invitations are dated between January 18 and May 
2 and were addressed to the following people: 
 
Y'Chroih 
Y Chroih Bap Rok 
Y Chroih Ma Roc (a.k.a. Y Chroih Ma Roh) 
Y Tai "Ma Jay" (a.k.a. Y Tai Ma Jani) 
Y Son 
H'Pleh (Ami Vol) 
Y'Hoan B'Krong 
Y Duc K Man 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The invitations originating with the police in Krong 
No District requested the individuals to meet with officers at 
the police station to "work".  This verb is commonly taken to 
mean that the invited person will have to discuss certain 
subjects with the police. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The invitations originating with the Chairman or 
Vice-Chairman of the Fatherland Front Committee of Truong Xuan 
Commune, Dak Song District, state the purpose of the meeting is 
"to review Decision No. 26/ND-CP regarding religious affairs, 
as per step 2 of the plan to disband the Protestant Church 
Council", or "to discuss the religious situation". 
 
¶6.  (SBU) According to Post's contact, the pastors of these 
individuals reported that each time the individual arrived at 
the required time and place, s/he would be lectured by the 
official on the law relating to the recognition of churches in 
Vietnam.  Then the individual would be asked to sign a paper 
agreeing to disband the lay church council of the unrecognized 
Protestant church to which s/he belonged.  If the individual 
did not agree to sign, s/he had to stay in the office until 
close of business.  Post's contact said that sometimes this 
daily summons and "office detention" would continue for up to 
two weeks. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment: This is the first time Post has seen what 
appears to be an  official paper request to disband a house 
church council.  As far as we know, the GVN's official 
recognition of the Southern Evangelical Church of Vietnam 
(SECV) did not stipulate a limit on the number of churches that 
could be recognized within each district within a province.  In 
previous discussions with the Ethnic Minority and Religious 
Affairs Committees of Dak Lak and Gia Lai Provinces, committee 
members never mentioned a limit on the number of churches, but 
did say each "sub-association" seeking recognition as a church 
should have a minimum of about 100 members.  However, Post's 
contact has indicated that when his pastor friends discussed 
applying for official GVN recognition through the SECV, they 
were told by district officials there could only be one 
recognized Protestant church -- of any denomination --  per 
district.  Post's contact said that believers of all sects have 
been told they must consolidate with the the single recognized 
Protestant church in their district in order to be considered 
legal.  (All house churches and their church councils remain 
technically illegal.)  ConGenoffs will pursue this issue with 
provincial officials and reliable contacts.  End comment. 
YAMAUCHI