This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001546 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/11/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON EFIN PINS TU
SUBJECT: NEW TURKISH GOVERNMENT: WHAT WILL ERDOGAN'S 
CABINET LOOK LIKE? 
 
REF: ANKARA 1364 
 
 
(U) Classified by Polcouns John Kunstadter; reasons: 1.5 
(b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: AK Party chairman Erdogan has the mandate to 
form a new Turkish government.  We expect him to shuffle the 
outgoing cabinet, although timing of the shuffle is not yet 
certain.  While the Erdogan government might assume office 
quickly, contacts across the spectrum advise us Erdogan is 
not in a hurry to re-submit a U.S. deployment resolution to 
parliament.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) AK Party chairman Tayyip Erdogan has taken the oath as 
an M.P., current P.M. Abdullah Gul has submitted his 
resignation, and President Sezer has given Erdogan the 
mandate to form a new government. 
 
 
¶3. (U) We expect Erdogan to submit his cabinet list to Sezer 
quickly, perhaps as early as March 12.  Reftel gives the 
sequence and timing of steps for the new government to assume 
power, present its program, and then be confirmed in a vote 
of confidence.  In any event the Erdogan government will take 
office from the moment Sezer approves a cabinet list and 
sends it to parliament, which could be as early as March 12. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Korkut Ozal, a brother of late P.M./President Turgut 
Ozal and a Godfather to the reformist wing of the National 
View (Milli Gorus) Islamist movement ("the Movement") which 
Erdogan grew up in, told us March 11 he has urged Erdogan to 
focus first on passing a U.S. deployment resolution and only 
then shuffle the cabinet.  Otherwise, Ozal thinks, the 
resentments provoked by changes in the cabinet will further 
distract Erdogan and compound the fate of any new draft 
resolution.  Ozal acknowledged, however, that Erdogan's 
temper may get the better of him and lead him to shuffle the 
cabinet at the beginning of his tenure. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Faruk Demir -- the executive director of the Advanced 
Strategy Center (YSM), which has close links to the TGS, NSC, 
and National Intelligence Organization -- told us March 10 
that he has heard Erdogan's cabinet shuffle may affect a 
sizeable slice of the cabinet.  Demir's analysis of why 
Erdogan may replace some or all of the following: 
 
 
--Deputy P.M. Ertugrul Yalcinbayir (known as a "liberalist"; 
he reportedly voted against the draft resolution to permit 
deployment of U.S. troops because he already knew he would 
not be included in the Erdogan cabinet); 
--Deputy P.M. Mehmet Ali Sahin (seen by Erdogan's circle as 
too close to Gul); 
--State Minister in charge of finance Ali Babacan (nervous, 
pushy, and lacking the sense of deference Erdogan demands); 
--State Minister in charge of foreign trade Kursad Tuzmen 
(not deferential enough); 
--State Minister in charge of religious affairs Mehmet Aydin 
(reportedly close to Islamist philosopher Fethullah Gulen, 
and thus not considered inside the National View Islamist 
circle among Erdogan's close advisors; 
--Fonmin Yasar Yakis (Erdogan had not wanted Yakis as Fonmin 
in the Gul government, but was forced to put him in the 
position in a rearrangement resulting from Sezer's rejection 
of another cabinet designate; in any event, Yakis has been a 
hack-handed embarrassment to Erdogan); 
--Culture Minister Huseyin Celik (similarly to Yalcinbayir, 
voted against the deployment resolution because he had heard 
he would not be in Erdogan's cabinet; in any event 
controversial as minister); 
--Tourism Minister Aksit (ineffective); 
--Education Minister Erkan Mumcu (not from the Movement and 
too openly ambitious for Erdogan's taste; might be shifted to 
a lower-profile ministry). 
 
 
¶6. (C) Demir said his sources tell him that, as part of a 
move to reduce the number of ministries, Erdogan may combine 
the Babacan and Tuzmen portfolios under a single 
finance/foreign trade state ministership; figures rumored to 
be under consideration are AK Party deputy chairman for 
research and development Reha Denemec (excellent English; MBA 
from the U.S.) or Nazim Ekrem. 
 
 
¶7. (C) In addition a visibly nervous Justice Minister Cemil 
Cicek, one of the most experienced members of Gul's cabinet 
but not a member of the Movement, told us March 11 he is not 
certain he will be kept on, a reflection of how close to the 
chest Erdogan is keeping his choices. 
 
 
¶8. (C) Mehmet Ali Bayar, a former Turkish diplomat with wide 
political contacts and now senior foreign policy advisor to 
right-of-center DYP chairman Agar, warned us March 11 that 
Erdogan will stall submission of a new draft deployment 
resolution as long as possible.  Bayar opines that Erdogan 
and his advisors are wrapped up in narrowly-focused 
calculations of how to ensure personal position and power. 
In making a similar assessment to us March 10, YSM executive 
director Demir stated that Erdogan is scared for his 
political future and therefore paralyzed in his 
decision-making on the deployment question. 
¶9. (C) Founding member of Ozal's ANAP and former close Ozal 
advisor Vehbi Dincerler affirmed to us as well March 11 that 
Erdogan will not tangle with the resolution unless the U.S. 
gives him something he can portray to the Turkish public as 
an additional U.S. commitment, e.g., a concrete clarification 
of Turkey's role in post-Saddam Iraq, a U.S. commitment on 
the role of the Turkmen in N. Iraq, a stronger U.S. 
commitment to prevent formation of an independent Kurdish 
state.  In discussing timing, Korkut Ozal told us that the 
lack of an absolute drop-dead date from the U.S. for the 
beginning of hostilities is also making it hard for Erdogan 
to feel a sense of urgency. 
PEARSON