This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR T, AC/CB, NP/CBM, VC/CCB, L/ACV, IO/S 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISP 
JOINT STAFF FOR DD, PMA-1 FOR WTC 
COMMERCE FOR BIS (GOLDMAN) 
NSC FOR CHUPA 
WINPAC FOR LIEPMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2013 
TAGS: PARM PREL CWC
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC): UNDER SECRETARY 
BOLTON EXPRESSES U.S. SUPPORT FOR OPCW DIRECTOR GENERAL 
PFIRTER 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Eric M. Javits, Ambassador to the OPCW.  Reas 
ons: 1.5 (B, D) 
 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is CWC-126-03. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Under Secretary Bolton met with OPCW 
Director-General Pfirter on Nov. 19 to convey strong U.S. 
support for Pfirter's leadership of the Organization.  The DG 
in turn expressed his appreciation for U.S. support regarding 
his efforts on reform and transparency.  Bolton noted that 
the OPCW is headed in the right direction, and highlighted 
the close cooperation between the U.S. and the OPCW Technical 
Secretariat, which had not been the case under Pfirter's 
 
SIPDIS 
predecessor.  He stressed his hope that the U.S. could 
continue to support the DG and the organization as they 
persevered in pursuing positive directions. 
 
¶3.  (U)  As an example, Pfirter stressed and Bolton noted the 
improvements in the personnel system, and ensuring that 
qualified people are brought into the OPCW under a fair and 
open process.  Pfirter replied by giving assurances of 
continued transparency in the recruitment process and noting 
that he fully shared the Under Secretary's views on the 
importance of recruiting good people. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Bolton went on to credit the OPCW accomplishments 
this year.  In particular, he emphasized the importance the 
U.S. placed on achieving the extension of its 45% destruction 
deadline.  In addition to reaching agreement on a budget for 
2004 to continue operational improvements, Bolton noted the 
significance of the action plans on universality and national 
implementation and the importance of doing the work called 
for therein. 
 
¶5.  (U)  The Under Secretary noted the continued rumors that 
Libya is ready to join the CWC, and asked if there had been 
any specific indications from the Libyans about imminent 
accession.  Pfirter replied that he had heard the same 
rumors, but there had as yet been no definite action on the 
part of Libya.  Bolton briefly noted the U.S. concern about 
the judgment from the ILO Administrative Tribunal in favor of 
former DG Bustani.  Pfirter assured Bolton that the 
organization is in the process of preparing an appeal for 
reconsideration. 
 
¶6.  (C)  The Under Secretary also expressed concern about 
covert CW programs, which led to a discussion of the 
necessity of UN inspection capabilities.  Bolton expressed 
the personal view that there is no reason for UNSCOM in the 
aftermath of the Iraq action to continue to maintain a 
separate inspection force to monitor CW programs, as the OPCW 
should be able increasingly to take on such a responsibility, 
if and when called upon by the UN provided the budgetary 
concerns were met.  Pfirter agreed, explaining that the UN is 
aware that the OPCW is ready to assist if called upon.  He 
cautioned, however, that other inspections would have to be 
foregone or postponed in such an eventuality. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Turning to the issue of challenge inspections, 
Pfirter told the Under Secretary that the TS is committed to 
readiness for performance of a challenge inspection, if the 
need arises.  He noted again that resources are a key factor, 
explaining that no challenge inspection(s) have been included 
in the budget, and that implementation of a challenge 
inspection would generate a change in the regular inspection 
schedule.  Bolton informed the DG that the U.S. did not 
currently have plans to call for a challenge inspection. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Under Secretary Bolton has cleared this message. 
 
¶9.  (U)  Javits sends. 
SOBEL