This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161512Z Nov 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 007428 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2013 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PHUM JO
SUBJECT: GOJ SPOKESPERSON TALKS ENTHUSIASTICALLY ABOUT 
HUMAN RIGHTS AND PRESS FREEDOM, BUT HAS NO CONCRETE PLAN 
 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b) (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  An enthusiastic Asma Khader, the new government 
Spokesperson, outlined for the Ambassador her intent to use 
her position in the cabinet to shape GOJ policies to support 
greater press freedom, respect for human and women's rights, 
and development of NGOs.  Khader, a lawyer and activist from 
the NGO community, also emphasized the need for NGOs and 
citizens to have access to information about government goals 
and performance.  However, she presented no concrete plan to 
achieve her goals, and -- with no staff to support her -- 
will have few resources to encourage reform.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------- 
AN ACTIVIST TURNED CABINET MEMBER 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  New GOJ spokesperson, Asma Khader, told the 
Ambassador and PolCouns November 12 that she was very proud 
to be a part of the new government, which she described as 
having "the highest percentage of women ever in the region, 
and in non-traditional positions as well."  Coming out of the 
human and women's rights NGO community, she enthusiastically 
described her mission as trying to increase "freedom of 
access to the media and modern knowledge."  She said she also 
hopes to increase citizen involvement in political life and 
government decision-making, and to demonstrate to women that 
they can play roles outside of the traditional tribal and 
family structure.  She noted, however, that as part of a 
government, she would have certain "restraints" on her 
activism.  She described her ministerial appointment as an 
opportunity to influence the government's program on women's 
and children's issues and human rights, noting that senior 
royal family members have always accepted these principles 
and provided support. 
 
------------------------------ 
OPENING UP THE MEDIA -- SLOWLY 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C)  Khader said she wants to strengthen the independence 
of the media and media-associated institutions like the 
Higher Council for Media.  "I hope this government will 
encourage freedom of the press," she said.  One way to do 
this, she suggested, is to challenge the local press by 
opening up to outside media.  There are good Jordanian media 
people, but they have tended to be hired away by other 
regional media outlets -- such as Lebanon and Gulf-based 
satellite TV stations.  It may be necessary, Khader 
suggested, to pay higher salaries and provide more 
opportunities for training and professional development to 
keep good media people in Jordan. 
 
----------------------------------- 
TRANSPARENCY OF GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  Khader said that another of her chief goals would be 
to promote "transparency" in government programs by making 
information about government policies, goals, and statistics 
available easily to NGOs and average citizens.  This 
transparency will permit Jordanians and interest groups to 
evaluate the performance of the government against objective 
standards, and suggest alternatives when necessary.  The 
King, she said, hopes to set up "a place" -- an office, web 
site, or both -- where citizens can go and have their 
questions answered. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
GOVERNMENT NEEDS NGO PRESSURE TO IMPROVE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Asked about her experience as an NGO leader, she 
said that the Jordanian NGO community has for many years been 
"caught between the government and opposition, and we were 
beaten by both."  The government, she said, routinely 
discouraged large NGO gatherings, arguing to NGO event 
organizers that they should invite "only 10, 20, or 30 
people" to conferences and meetings.  With these small 
numbers, she said, it was hard to sustain the drive needed in 
NGO work.  The opposition (read Islamists) routinely attacked 
NGOs for their Western sources of funding and liberal causes 
such as women's and human rights.  Moreover, NGOs in Jordan 
have done little to help themselves, she argued, criticizing 
the existing NGO community as poorly organized and meek.  If 
NGOs start to bring well thought out ideas to the government, 
she promised, "I know the government will listen.  Government 
needs pressure groups to improve," she declared.  She said 
that she would push for a further liberalization  of the NGO 
law.  "If you let NGOs do their work, they will not go to 
extremes." 
 
¶6.  (C)  She confirmed that the government has not yet 
designated a locus in the cabinet for women's and human 
rights policy, partially, she explained, because the 
government intends to integrate these issues into the 
programs of all ministries.  (NOTE:  Since the formation of 
this new government, several human and women's rights 
activists have mentioned to us their disappointment at the 
lack of a clearly defined, ministerial level point of contact 
for human rights and women's issues.  END NOTE.) 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Khader was enthusiastic about the direction of the 
new government, her new portfolio, and her potential for 
influencing GOJ policies in a positive direction.  At the 
same time, she seems to realize that the "traditional" way of 
doing business will be a real drag on her and the 
government's reform agenda.  While full of good intent, 
Khader did not present a concrete plan for achieving her 
goals -- in fact, she seemed to be thinking out loud during 
much of the conversation.  In addition, as a cabinet member 
without a ministry to support her, she will have little more 
than moral suasion to bring to bear in encouraging openness 
in the policies of other ministries. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM