This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/11/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: JULY 11 REACTIONS TO IRAQ INCIDENT 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reason:1.5(b)(d) 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: sensationalist reporting on the July 4 
detentions of Turkish Special Forces (TSF) by U.S. troops 
continued to fade in the July 11 Turkish press, with the 
incident pushed off the front pages in several major dailies. 
 Ultra-nationalists, advocating a "reevaluation" of the 
bilateral relationship, continue publicly and privately to 
use harsh rhetoric in support of military hard-liners, and to 
demand a U.S. apology.  Nevertheless, despite the rhetoric, 
since the return of the detainees to Turkish custody, we have 
not seen any steps towards a break in dialogue or diminution 
of relations including on commercial military (or 
non-military) deals.  End summary. 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
U.S. Unapologetic, AK "Rational" 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (U) The front page of the July 11 mainstream mass daily 
"Hurriyet" reports that General Sylvester, during the meeting 
of the joint fact-finding commission, acknowledged that the 
incident was "not a pleasant one," but added that he was "not 
in a position to apologize." 
 
 
-- "Hurriyet" theorized that General Sylvester decided to go 
to northern Iraq only after hearing the reports about the 
incident presented by the Turks. 
 
 
-- Mainstream "Sabah" quotes Lieutenant General Koksal 
Karabay, head of the Turkish team, as saying the incident was 
"a scandal, no matter what the reason" for the U.S. action. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Papers highlighted statements by F.M. Gul and P.M. 
Erdogan that were measured. 
 
 
-- Gul asserted that Turkish forces "were not involved in a 
secret mission," and said that the evidence presented by the 
 
SIPDIS 
United States thus far was "not persuasive." He added that 
there was "no chance" that the TSF were operating "outside of 
the chain of command of the Turkish Armed Forces."  Gul 
claimed that Turkey wants to "work for stability in northern 
Iraq."  He said that the discussions of the fact-finding team 
were proceeding "based on mutual trust," and predicted that 
"everything will come out" once the commission has completed 
its work. 
 
 
-- In his monthly television address to the nation July 10, 
Erdogan described the government's approach to the incident 
as one of "uncompromising realism and determination."  He 
reiterated his earlier assertion that the incident was 
"ugly"; he also lashed out at those who had criticized the 
Government for not reacting more forcefully against the USG. 
Erdogan asserted that the state administration must act "not 
by emotional reaction," but through "determined and rational 
steps."  On July 11, he also reminded T.V. reporters that the 
mil/mil commission had not yet reached any conclusions. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Major commentators were generally moderate. 
"Hurriyet's" Ferai Tinc, who has frequently criticized U.S. 
policies in Iraq, stressed the importance of U.S.-Turkish 
coordination and urged the two sides to reestablish trust 
between them.  Tinc pointed out that a continued lack of 
coordination in Iraq,s restructuring will only strengthen 
the region,s terrorists.  Fehmi Koru, a strong U.S. critic 
in the Islam-oriented "Yeni Safak," stressed the need to 
restore a "healthy" relationship between Turkey and the 
United States.  Koru urged F.M. Gul to carry through on his 
planned visit to Washington in coming weeks. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Pro-Military MHP: "Strategic Partnership is Over..." 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Vice Chairman for the ultra-nationalist MHP Ercument 
Konukman asserted to us July 11 that the alleged treatment of 
Turkish soldiers at the hands of U.S. forces was 
"unacceptable" and demanded that the USG apologize publicly. 
He suggested that the Kurds were beneath the Turks and thus 
not fit subjects for U.S. protection.  Konukman also strongly 
intimated that members of the MHP's "idealist" cadres (note: 
the notorious "Ulkuculer") are assisting/working with Turkish 
military in n. Iraq.  The Turkish military, he said, is 
following the same policy in n. Iraq that it has followed for 
the last decade; it does not trust the US to protect Turkey's 
interests.  MHP believes Turkey must "reevaluate" its 
relationship with the U.S., he added.  "I'm sorry," Konukman 
said.  "The Strategic Partnership is over." 
 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
...But Commercial Dialogue Unaffected So Far 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Despite calls in the press earlier this week for 
Turkey to to take firm measures including canceling its 
purchase of 4 AWACs planes from Boeing and reports in 
yesterday's "Milliyet" that the TGS had been "boycotting" 
talks on the purchase of King Cobra attack helicopters since 
July 7 (they were, but since the return of Turkish Special 
Forces to Turkish custody are now again participating) there 
is nothing to suggest a break in dialogue on commercial 
military (or non-military) deals. 
 
 
¶7. (C) Comment:  The military probably is trying as hard as 
it can to avoid using these defense contracts as a political 
tool since any setback could open up the fenced defense 
procurement funds to claims by AK politicians (including the 
P.M.) who want the money for social programs.  It is worth 
also noting that the GOT yesterday proposed holding the next 
meeting of the Economic Partnership Commission in October, a 
sign that they want to continue dialogue. 
PEARSON