This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 000949 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ETRD KU
SUBJECT: ICAO DEMARCHE DELIVERED 
 
REF: A. STATE 66380 
 
     ¶B. STATE 168200 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. On March 16, 2003, EconOff met with Fawaz Al-Farah, Deputy 
Director General of Aviation Safety and Air Transport at 
Kuwait's Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), and 
Mohammad Abdul Rahim, Chief of the International Relations 
Division at DGCA's Air Transport Department, to deliver 
reftel A points.  Abdul Rahim and another Air Transport 
Department staff member to be determined are planning to 
represent the GOK at the ICAO Worldwide Air Transport 
Conference in Montreal, including the two-day preparatory 
seminar March 22-23. 
 
¶2. Al-Farah said that the GOK had initially intended to send 
senior level officials to the conference, but decided instead 
on lower, technical level representation due to the situation 
in the region.  Al-Farah added that Kuwait's Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs has requested that the Kuwaiti Embassy in 
Ottawa send its Ambassador or another senior level diplomat 
to represent the GOK at the Extraordinary Assembly session 
scheduled to convene immediately after the Transport 
Conference. 
 
¶3. While Kuwait is not an Open Skies partner, Al-Farah said 
the GOK could support many of the USG positions on 
liberalization of air service rights.  The Kuwaiti officials, 
however, would be attending the Montreal conference in 
largely in a "listen-and-learn" capacity.  Al-Farah said once 
the situation in Kuwait settles, the GOK would be interested 
in reopening discussions on Open Skies. 
 
¶4. COMMENT: Per reftel B, Post has engaged in Open Skies 
discussions with DGCA previously.  The results of those 
discussions suggested the GOK does not fully understand the 
implications of Open Skies.  We suggest appropriate USG 
officials seek out GOK officials to review past efforts in 
this regard in furtherance of Kuwait's "listen-and-learn" 
mission. 
JONES