This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT, INR/NESA; NSC FOR E. 
MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:     DECL:  09-11-13 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PINR CE
SUBJECT:  In good news for peace process, President puts 
possible pact with radical party on hold 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1583, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by James F. Entwistle, Deputy Chief of 
Mission. Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  President Kumaratunga has firmly 
signaled that a possible pact between her party and the 
radical JVP is on hold for now.  In explaining her 
decision, the president made clear that the two sides 
could not agree on peace process issues.  According to 
observers, however, other factors, such as domestic 
politics and international opinion, heavily influenced 
her decision.  The pact idea could clearly be revived, 
but its absence for now is good news for the UNP 
governing coalition as it tries to manage difficult 
peace process issues.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) PACT ON HOLD:  President Kumaratunga has put on 
hold a possible pact between her Sri Lanka Freedom Party 
(SLFP), the key constituent element of her People's 
Alliance (PA) grouping, and the radical Janantha 
Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) ("People's Liberation Front") 
party.  The president communicated her views to the JVP 
leadership at a September 5 meeting held at her office 
in Colombo (see below).  The president's decision 
effectively closes down, at least for now, months of 
rolling discussions between high-level SLFP and JVP 
negotiators which began in early 2003 (See Reftels). 
The discussions between the two sides had focused on 
drawing up a written alliance agreement containing 
policy elements and a plan for joint electoral lists for 
parliamentary elections. 
 
¶3.  (C) PRESIDENT HIGHLIGHTS POLICY DIFFERENCES:  The 
September 5 meeting appears to have been quite 
contentious.  According to corroborated reports, after 
arriving late at the meeting, the president told the JVP 
representatives that she had long wanted the two major 
opposition groupings, the SLFP and the JVP, to align so 
they could effectively confront the United National 
Front (UNF) government.  She could not, however, agree 
with aspects of the JVP's comprehensive anti-peace 
process stance, including the group's refusal to accept 
constitutional devolution as a possible solution to the 
ethnic conflict.  The president also noted that the 
JVP's strong stance against third party facilitation and 
Norway's role went too far for her.  Due to these 
concerns, the president did not foresee completion of a 
pact in the near-term.  At this point, upset with the 
president's message, the JVP representatives reportedly 
walked out of the meeting. 
 
¶4.  (C) POLITICAL CONCERNS:  In making her points to the 
JVP, the president hit on many themes she has made 
before regarding a possible pact, some of which she made 
earlier in the week during the SLFP's national 
conference.  Indeed, since she came to power in late 
1994, the president has made clear that she favors a 
peaceful resolution to the conflict through devolved 
powers for the north and east.  That said, many 
observers feel that her rejection of the JVP at this 
time has as much to do with politics as policy.  In a 
September 10 meeting, for example, Taranjit Sandhu, 
polchief at the Indian High Commission, told polchief 
that he thought the president was worried that her party 
would lose political support if it joined with the JVP 
at this time.  Sandhu reasoned that the peace process 
remained quite popular with the public.  Thus, the 
president, reading the tea leaves, did not want to be 
firmly linked with the anti-peace process JVP until and 
unless public opinion shifted toward a more skeptical 
approach. 
 
¶5.  (C) Other observers have told us that they believe 
that the president was also worried that she would lose 
the respect of the international community if she 
entered into a pact with the JVP.  Jehan Perera, an 
analyst at the Center for Policy Alternatives, a local 
think-tank, told poloff on September 10 that he thought 
the president cared a great deal for her reputation in 
the international community.  Given the generally bad 
reviews the possible alliance was receiving, Perera 
thought that the president was probably worried that 
linking up with the JVP would hurt her credibility as 
someone who wants ethnic reconciliation in Sri Lanka. 
Tomas Stangeland, a Norwegian Embassy poloff, agreed 
with this view, commenting to polchief on September 9 
that the president probably grew concerned that her 
reputation in international circles would be severely 
tarnished by association with the Sinhalese chauvinist 
JVP. 
 
¶6.  (C) REVIVAL OF POSSIBLE PACT?:  Although the 
possible pact is on the back burner for now, the 
president, her supporters, and the JVP have made clear 
that the idea could be revived.  The president, for 
example, has indicated that she continues to keep the 
idea of a pact in her back pocket.  At the same time, 
Anura Bandaranaike, the president's brother and a senior 
SLFP MP who is a strong proponent of a pact, has made 
clear that he thinks that the idea could still be sealed 
soon if both sides are prepared to compromise.  In the 
meantime, while its leaders clearly bristled over 
Kumaratunga's decision to stop the formal discussions, 
the JVP continues to indicate that it is open to the 
idea of an alliance.  Wimal Weerawanse, a senior JVP MP, 
has been quoted in the press, for example, as asserting 
that the JVP still wants a pact and will continue to 
urge the SLFP to join in an "anti-government front." 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT:  Kumaratunga is a cunning political 
strategist who likes to surprise.  She is also mercurial 
in temperament.  In light of these factors and in the 
face of the latest soundings, it would not be a complete 
shock if the pact idea was suddenly revived in short 
order.  That said, there seems little likelihood of the 
proposal making a comeback soon, which removes some of 
the haze which has been hanging over the domestic 
political landscape for months now.  That is good news 
for the UNF government as it tries to manage difficult 
peace process issues.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize considered. 
LUNSTEAD