This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 001177 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, MARCH 30: WAR IN IRAQ; ARAB 
OPPOSITION TO WAR 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Media commentary reflects a sense of alienation 
and resentment vis-a-vis Kuwait's Arab League confreres. 
Demonstrations were held this week in front of the Libyan 
and Syrian embassies in Kuwait, and a proposal now before 
the National Assembly calls for parliamentary approval of 
any financial aid to Arab countries. 
 
Commentators opine that Iraqis are not rebelling against 
Saddam's regime because they remember their experience in 
1991, when the US "encouraged and then deserted them." On 
the news pages, five Iraqi infiltrators, believed to be 
Fedayeen Saddam militia members, were apprehended at the 
Kuwaiti border on March 28. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  News Stories: The lead story in all newspapers on March 
30 is coverage of a missile that exploded after midnight in 
the sea near a popular Kuwait City waterfront mall, injuring 
two. The air raid sirens did not sound, as the missile 
reportedly came in under radar level. 
 
Five suspected Fedayeen Saddam were apprehended after 
crossing into Kuwait on March 28, reports Al-Seyassa. 
 
Al-Qabas front pages a report that approximately 85 percent 
of high school students came to school on March 29, the 
first day of classes since schools were closed one week ago 
due to the outbreak of hostilities. 
 
National Assembly Speaker Jassem Al-Khrafi described the pro- 
Iraqi demonstrations in some Arab countries as "controlled 
and not staged voluntarily", Al-Qabas reports on its front 
page. 
 
Al-Qabas also reports that MP Khaled Al-Adwa has urged the 
National Assembly to adopt a resolution requiring National 
Assembly approval of any financial assistance from the 
Kuwait Arab Fund to protest the Arab stance towards Saddam's 
regime. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that the American Embassy in Kuwait 
has received hundreds of phone calls this week supporting 
the war in Iraq. 
 
Around 2000 Kuwaitis demonstrated on March 25 in front of 
several Arab embassies. The protestors chanted slogans 
against Saddam's regime, Arab satellite channels that 
"support" the regime and Syrian and Libyan support of 
Saddam, Al-Rai Al-Aam reports. 
 
Kuwaiti students returning from Jordan tell Al-Rai Al-Aam 
that they were abused and their cars vandalized. Al-Qabas 
reports that Kuwaiti students in Bahrain have also faced 
abuse and plans are being made to assist their return to 
Kuwait. 
 
Kuwait News Agency (KUNA) reports that three hotels in 
Kuwait City received bomb threats on March 28, all hoaxes. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that on March 30, 1.5 million liters 
of drinking water from Kuwait will arrive in Umm Qasr. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "No Gloating" 
Conservative Salah Al-Fadli wrote in independent Al-Rai Al- 
Aam (3/26):  "The American war on Iraq does not have any 
kind of legal or moral legitimacy. The only good thing that 
will come out of this war is getting rid of Saddam. It is 
shameful and regrettable that some simple-minded people, in 
the face of global American hegemony, gloat at Iraq now. 
Instead of gloating, we should be wary for the future of 
this region and for the fate of our communities in the face 
of future [American] plans for the area." 
 
¶4. "Coordination with the Iraqi Opposition" 
Shiite MP Abdul-Mohsen Yousef Jamal wrote in independent Al- 
Qabas (3/26): "Some wonder why people in southern Iraq, are 
not rising up against the [Iraqi] regime as they did in 
¶1991. Perhaps they fear a repeat performance by Saddam's 
regime, when after former President Bush first encouraged 
and then deserted them, they became easy prey. Currently, 
they are probably waiting. to see if America's claim of 
changing the Iraqi regime is credible. Another reason is 
that the Americans to date have refused to coordinate with 
the Iraqi opposition. American coordination with the Iraqi 
opposition is crucial, and the quicker the better since 
condemnation of the war is on everyone's lips." 
 
¶5. "A Salute to the Coalition Forces" 
Liberal Ibrahim Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Seyassah 
(3/29): "Al-Arabia satellite channel has become the new 
mouthpiece for the leader of the Iraqi regime. They have 
begun broadcasting pictures of children, women and old men 
stained with blood and claiming that they are the victims of 
the American strike on Iraq. Al-Jazeera and Al-Arabia will 
not succeed in defending the regime in Baghdad, no matter 
how hard they try." 
 
¶6. "Kuwait's Interests First" 
Liberal Dr. Naji Al-Zaid wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(3/29): "We offered [Syria] 1,109 million dollars as aid, 
without interest. This money was given so that Syrian 
citizens could live in comfort. This applies also to Lebanon 
and other Arab countries. Unfortunately. they still insist 
on keeping Saddam and his regime in power. Our interests are 
no longer with any country that does not support our right 
to exist. Our interests lie with those who can guarantee us 
our freedom, sovereignty and democracy." 
 
¶7. "Kuwait's Aid and the Arab Demonstrations" 
Mohammad Al-Ajmi wrote in independent Al-Watan (3/30):  "Why 
all the demonstrations against Kuwait? Are the American 
missiles, which strike Iraq, made in Kuwait? Can Kuwait 
prevent the US and Britain from achieving their goals? 
Kuwait is now sharing its food and water with the Iraqis 
while other Arab countries are still chanting in support of 
Saddam. We have offered them food and water-- what have 
other countries offered them?" 
 
¶8. "Let us Annex Southern Iraq" 
Liberal Faisal Al-Qanai, Secretary General of Kuwait 
Journalists Association, wrote in independent Al-Seyassah 
(3/30): "We do not know where the next Iraqi missile will 
strike. We are not concerned about any Arab League 
statement, because we will not see one of condemnation [of 
missile attacks on Kuwait]. This outrageous Iraqi attack on 
us [on March 29] gives us justification to defend ourselves 
by allowing Kuwaiti forces to occupy southern Iraq and annex 
it to Al-Jahra governate." 
 
 
JONES