This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUATEMALA 000962 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HARARE FOR BRUCE WHARTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KJUS GT
SUBJECT: OMINOUS SIGNS COME IN THREES: LATEST HUMAN RIGHTS 
SETBACKS 
 
REF: A. 02 GUATEMALA 3160 
 
     ¶B. 02 GUATEMALA 3213 
     ¶C. 02 GUATEMALA 3275 
     ¶D. GUATEMALA 884 
 
¶1. (U) Both in the capital and farther afield, new human 
rights concerns are popping up in Guatemala.  To the north, 
in Quiche, a Mayan priest and human rights activist was 
murdered; to the east, in Izabal, the Human Rights Ombudsman 
(PDH) Auxiliary office was ransacked; here in the Guatemala 
City, the home of Nineth Montenegro (New Nation Alliance 
(ANN) Congresswoman and Mutual Support Group (GAM) founder) 
and Mario Polanco (GAM Director) was robbed.  Embassy 
inquiries and efforts to support activists continue, as shown 
in the Peccerelli case, but deteriorating security conditions 
and governmental apathy remain troubling.  End Summary. 
 
Violence Strikes Again in Quiche 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Diego Xon Salazar, a Mayan priest, was found dead 
Saturday, April 5, in Quiche province.  Xon Salazar had 
reportedly been receiving death threats due to his active 
role in GAM, a human rights NGO, and his protest of the 
resurgence of the ex-civilian patrollers (ex-PACs) in 
war-torn Quiche.  GAM is denouncing the GOG for knowledge of 
death threats against Xon Salazar and refusal to provide 
protection.  An investigation of his death remains pending. 
This is the second murder of a Mayan indigenous activist in 
six months, the first being Antonio Pop Caal of Alta Verapaz 
in October 2002. (Ref A) 
 
Auxiliary Ombudsmen at Risk? 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Waldemar Barerra, Auxiliary Ombudsman in Izabal 
province, reported that he was assaulted and his offices 
ransacked in early April.  Barerra reported that his 
investigation reports and computer equipment were stolen, but 
valuable items were left behind, leading him to believe that 
the thieves were politically and not economically motivated. 
Barerra's office has been involved in a number of high 
profile cases, such as the Chocon case, involving the former 
anti-narcotics police, and the murder of journalist Mynor 
Alegria, as well as the investigation of many campesino 
killings. (Ref B) 
 
Domestic Tranquility Shattered 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Professionally active and powerful, yet personally 
private, duo Nineth Montenegro and Mario Polanco were 
victimized on April 7, when five armed men stormed their home 
and robbed them of property valued over 100,000 quetzals 
(12,500 dollars) and issued threats to Polanco, who was in 
Geneva with a delegation of human rights leaders.  Montenegro 
is an outspoken leftist congresswomen known for her work 
against impunity and for transparency.  Polanco is the 
Director of GAM and is very involved with the human right's 
movement's proposal for a Commission to Investigate Illegal 
Bodies and the Clandestine Security Apparatus (CICIACS). (Ref 
C) 
 
¶5. (U) The Ambassador called Montenegro on April 7, to 
express our concern and to inform her that he had spoken with 
both Minister of Government Reyes Calderon and Police Chief 
Manchame to push for a quick investigation and immediate 
police protection of Montenegro, Polanco, and their family. 
Montenegro thanked the Ambassador and promised to inform the 
Embassy of further developments.  DCM and Human Rights poloff 
met with Vice Minister of Government Caceres on April 10 and 
pressed him to provide all possible protections. 
 
Peccerelli Update 
----------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Following-up on Ambassador's March 31 meeting with 
Minister of Government Reyes Calderon (Ref D), DCM and HROff 
escorted Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology Foundation (FAFG) 
Director Fredy Peccerelli to a meeting with Vice Minister of 
Government Caceres.  DCM thanked Caceres for the police 
protection the MOG has provided the FAFG in the past, and 
asked him to consider the personal details and perimeter 
security that Peccerelli requested in response to recent 
death threats.  Caceres agreed to do so immediately and faxed 
the Embassy a copy of his official order to the police for 
Peccerelli's protection within three hours of the meeting. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7. (U) While deflating, these recent attacks re-enforce the 
need for continued USG pressure to push for the protection of 
human rights in the Capital and in the countryside.  We will 
continue to lobby the GOG for investigations of these 
egregious murders and robberies, as well as protection for 
those human rights leaders and government entities who 
soldier on despite such glaring obstacles and setbacks. 
HAMILTON