This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 003002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/02/2013 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL AF NL NATO
SUBJECT: DUTCH MAY DEPLOY APACHES IN SUPPORT OF ISAF 
 
REF: A. STATE 323022 
     ¶B. THE HAGUE 2911 
     ¶C. THE HAGUE 2726 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY POLITICAL COUNSELOR MARY DALY FOR REASONS 
1.5 (B AND D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  Dutch Defense Minister Kamp informed 
parliament on December 2 the GONL is investigating deploying 
four Apache attack helicopters to Afghanistan in support of 
ISAF.  Kamp's decision, which came following a request from 
Lord Robertson during the December 1 NATO Defense Ministers' 
meeting, caught Dutch MOD and MFA staffers by surprise.  The 
GONL has been reviewing various options for on the ground 
involvement in Afghanistan for several months, but not 
helicopters.  The Cabinet is expected to take up the matter 
on December 12.  A positive decision by the Cabinet will then 
go to parliament for debate, which is likely to take place 
before the Christmas recess.  Previous opposition calls for 
expanding ISAF's presence as well as the fact that this a 
NATO (and UNSCR endorsed) mission should help in securing 
parliamentary support for the deployment.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Dutch Defense Minister Henk Kamp notified the Dutch 
parliament on December 2 that the GONL will investigate the 
possibility of deploying four Dutch Air Force Apache AH-64 
attack helicopters to Afghanistan in support of NATO ISAF 
operations.  Kamp took this step in response to a request 
from Lord Robertson at the December 1 NATO Defense Ministers' 
meeting.  The Dutch were also asked to make available 
transport helicopters; however, Kamp declined as most of the 
Dutch Air Force's Chinook transport helicopters are being 
used to support the Dutch deployment to Iraq as part of the 
UK's Multi-National Division Southeast. 
 
¶3. (C) In subsequent discussions, GONL officials claimed to 
PolMilOff that Robertson's request and Kamp's accession came 
as a surprise.  The GONL has been contemplating various 
options for further involvement on the ground in Afghanistan 
for some time now (reftels).  These options include: 
deployment of Dutch Army special forces commandos in support 
of OEF, participation in the German-led PRT at Konduz or 
assisting in managing Kabul Airport.  Among the reasons for 
the lack of a decision to date include:  concerns about 
possible Guantanamo-implications should Dutch SOF detain Al 
Qaeda/Taliban members as well as the "murky relationship 
between OEF, ISAF and the PRTs."  An MFA Security Policy 
Bureau contact advised PolMilOff these potential 
contributions are still "on the table" even after Kamp's 
offer of Apaches.  An MOD policy advisor said it was 
important to note Kamp feels strongly that when NATO 
specifically directs a country to provide an asset, it should 
try and accommodate the request, and that voluntary force 
generation is not working.  According to the same MOD 
staffer, Kamp said he thought SACEUR (whom he met with on a 
November 24 visit to The Hague) should be able to direct 
specific requests from countries. 
 
¶4. (C) Kamp's letter to parliament represents the first 
formal step in GONL action on the NATO request.  MFA source 
advises that a Cabinet decision is expected on December 12. 
In the interim, MOD source says that GONL officials need to 
obtain clarity on the planned role of the Apaches.  A 
positive cabinet decision will then be notified to parliament 
which will debate the issue, presumably before the Christmas 
recess.  (Note:  in the Dutch system, a formal parliamentary 
vote of approval is not necessary; however, MPs could table a 
resolution of disapproval, but would only do so if they 
thought it likely to pass.) 
 
¶5. (C) Comment:  Given the repeated concerns raised among the 
allies about ISAF shortfalls,  Dutch officials may be 
protesting too much when they claim surprise at Robertson's 
request.  While approval is not guaranteed at this point, 
Kamp is a skilled operator who would be unlikely to make this 
commitment if he did not think he could deliver (MOD source 
advises he took the decision after consulting with the PM's 
office, MFA and the Dutch Air Force).  While the main 
opposition Labor Party's foreign affairs spokesman expressed 
some initial concerns with the proposed deployment, others in 
his party after visiting Afghanistan have previously called 
for expanding the ISAF mandate.  In addition, MFA sources 
concede that the fact this is a NATO mission covered by a 
specific UN Security Council Resolution should help in 
achieving parliamentary support.  End Comment. 
SOBEL