This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

241601Z Mar 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 HARARE 000600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV ASEC ZI MDC
SUBJECT: MUGABE INCITES BRUTALIZATION OF MDC SUPPORTERS 
 
REF: A. HARARE 591 
 
     ¶B. 2002 HARARE 2529 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
¶1. (C) In the wake of the successful March 18 - 19 MDC 
stayaway the GOZ has embarked on a massive retribution 
campaign against lower-level MDC officials, and some MDC MPs. 
 Police, suspected CIO officers and soldiers have arrested, 
beaten, raped and tortured several hundred MDC supporters. 
The GOZ's brutalization of Zimbabweans appears targeted at 
local MDC officials and was incited by President Mugabe, who 
gave a vitriolic speech on March 21 in which he threatened a 
crackdown on the MDC.  End Summary. 
 
Hundreds Seek Medical Attention 
------------------------------- 
¶2. (C) According to medical Dr. Frances Lovemore of Amani 
Trust, a local human rights NGO, over 250 people have sought 
medical attention at the Avenues Clinic alone in Harare for 
injuries sustained in political violence from March 19 - 24. 
Most of the injuries were soft-tissue bruises and cuts from 
beatings.  There were also cases of acid burns, two reported 
rapes and three submissions to electric shock torture; one 
death has been reported (Ref A).  According to the MDC, 83 
people had sought medical attention from its social welfare 
office by March 21 (Ref A), and another 50 from March 22 - 24. 
 
Soldiers Leading the Charge 
--------------------------- 
¶3. (U) According to victims' accounts, almost all of the 
incidents were perpetrated by groups of persons in Zimbabwe 
Defense Forces (ZDF) uniforms with official insignia, 
traveling in military personnel carriers, and some armed with 
AK-47 assault rifles.  In most cases the perpetrators arrived 
in the middle of the night to abduct and or beat local MDC 
officials and their families.  MDC officials believe some of 
the uniformed persons are actually GOZ National Youth Service 
members (called "green bombers" for their green uniforms) who 
have been given military uniforms and equipment, but are 
operating under orders from military officers.  The 
government-owned The Herald reported that 160 MDC members had 
been arrested around the country for perpetrating violence 
during the stayaway. 
 
Mugabe Calls for Crackdown on MDC, 
Blames West for Violence 
------------------------ 
¶4. (U) The upsurge in officially sponsored violence comes in 
the aftermath of recent statements by President Mugabe vowing 
greater action against the opposition MDC.  At the funeral of 
former Minister of Higher Education, Swithun Mombeshora, on 
March 21 at the National Heroes' Acre outside Harare, Mugabe 
said, "we shall not treat them (the MDC) with soft gloves 
anymore."  He said when freedom of expression was used to 
promote violence and terrorism, it should be curbed and those 
who promote the violence must be severely punished.  He went 
on to say that if Hitler fought for the freedom, justice and 
sovereignty of his people he (Mugabe) could be a black Hitler 
"ten-fold".  He accused Western nations, specifically the 
U.S., U.K, Netherlands and Germany, of paying the MDC to 
engage in violence. 
 
¶5. (U) The Following accounts were derived from Embassy 
Officer interviews with some of the victims: 
 
Retired Military Officer Tortured 
--------------------------------- 
¶6. (C) On March 21 in the middle of the night two persons in 
military uniform and insignia, herewith "soldiers", armed 
with AK-47s, and six suspected CIO officers abducted Elias 
(David) Shamu, a retired military armory officer, from his 
home in the Harare suburb of Mufakose.  Shamu had been 
threatened on numerous occasions and has attempted to conceal 
his military background.  GOZ authorities believe Shamu might 
pass sensitive military information to the MDC through his 
wife, Viola Shamu, who is an MDC councilor in Harare.  Shamu 
denies the claim or any personal involvement with the MDC. 
Shamu, who at first did not tell Poloff his real name, 
previously guided Poloff and a UN official to visit 
ex-commercial farm workers and was beaten when war vets 
detained the entire party at a commercial farm in Melfort in 
November (Ref B).  During the abduction on March 21 the 
soldiers and CIO officers beat Shamu's eleven and fourteen 
year old boys and 27-year-old cousin with sjamboks (rubber 
whips cut from car tires), and batons. 
¶7. (C) The CIO officers blindfolded Shamu, took him to an 
undisclosed location, and subjected him to electric shock 
torture administered to his fingers, toes and genitals. 
Three suspected CIO officers told him to open his mouth while 
they urinated into it accusing him of giving away sensitive 
information to the MDC.  Shamu was dumped unconscious, bound 
and blindfolded into a vacant field in Msasa near Harare at 
10 p.m. on March 21 where he awoke, unbound himself, and 
flagged down a passing car for assistance.  He was badly 
bruised, scarred, and cut over his face and entire body, and 
afraid of talking when Poloff interviewed him at Avenues 
Clinic on March 23. 
 
MDC Mabvuku Officials Beaten 
---------------------------- 
¶8. (U) On March 22 approximately five soldiers beat severely 
the MDC's chairwoman for women's issues for Mabvuku (a 
high-density suburb of Harare), her brother who is an MDC 
youth member, and their 55-year-old mother at their home in 
the Harare high-density suburb Mabvuku.  According to the 
brother, Crispin, about fifty soldiers arrived in the middle 
of the night and five beat them with batons particularly on 
the bottoms of their feet, and kicked them repeatedly.  The 
soldiers told the mother, who was naked when the soldiers 
arrived, to spread her legs; one of them inserted the barrel 
of an AK-47 assault rifle into her private parts while her 
children looked on.  Polchief interviewed the three at the 
Avenues Medical Clinic on March 23 and found them cut and 
bruised over their faces, backs, arms, legs and other areas. 
Crispin was unable to sit up on his own, his sister was 
traumatized, and his mother was reportedly suicidal.  The 
sister's wrists were swollen severely, possibly broken. 
 
¶9. (U) On approximately March 22 five soldiers arrived in the 
middle of the night at the home of the secretary for the MDC 
offices in Mabvuku.  She told the Defense Attache that the 
soldiers beat her, one raped her, and they forced her to 
drink her son's urine. They also accused her of associating 
with Amani Trust, and demanded information about the 
operations of the MDC office including whether the MDC had 
received USG funding. 
 
Violence Close to Embassy Homes 
------------------------------- 
¶10. (U) On March 22, Sharon Nell a 50-year old veterinary 
nurse in the low-density Harare suburb of Highlands, where 
many Embassy families live, came home to find five soldiers 
in her bedroom.  One of them said, "let's rape this white 
bitch"; they forced her to strip naked, pushed her around the 
room, and beat her severely with leather straps.  She didn't 
know whether she passed out or went into shock.  When Nell 
reported the incident to police, they suggested she report 
that "youths" were the perpetrators in order to avoid CIO 
harassment.  She was visibly bruised and shaken up when 
Polchief interviewed her at Avenues clinic on March 23. 
Though a veterinary nurse, Nell had offered to treat victims 
of violence in the wake of the stayaway.  After transferring 
to another hospital on March 24, Nell received a threatening 
phone call on her direct line in her room warning her against 
continuing to tell her story. 
 
MDC Councilor Abducted / Beaten 
-------------------------------- 
¶11. (U) On March 20 in the middle of the night, soldiers and 
suspected CIO officers abducted Murewa South city councilor 
and MDC local chairman Raphinas Madzokere from his home in 
Chitungwiza (a high-density suburb of Harare).  The soldiers 
took Madzokere's liberation war veteran's identity card, and 
MDC materials, beat him severely and then dumped him 
unconscious near his home on March 21.  Three soldiers 
returned to the house on March 22 and threatened the family 
with death.  Madzokere was living in Chitungwiza because 
ZANU-PF supporters had destroyed his home in Murewa last year. 
 
MDC Chinhoyi Leadership Beaten 
------------------------------ 
¶12. (U) On March 20 unknown assailants burned the Chinoyi 
offices of the General Agriculture and Plantation Worker's 
Union of Zimbabwe (GAPWUZ) to the ground.  Also in Chinhoyi 
unknown assailants burnt to the ground the ZANU-PF offices. 
In response to the latter, police arrested the entire 
Chinhoyi local MDC leadership, about twelve people, and beat 
them severely.  They were still in custody on March 24 
although no evidence has yet been released linking the MDC to 
the fire. 
 
Police Cancel MDC Rally, Beat Attendees 
--------------------------------------- 
¶13. (U) On March 23 riot police beat numerous MDC supporters 
who had arrived for a scheduled MDC rally in Kuwadzana.  Two 
days earlier Police had requested that MDC officials 
reschedule the rally to March 22 saying that President Mugabe 
would be speaking at a ZANU-PF rally in Kuwadzana on March 
¶23.  Having already made arrangements the MDC refused, and 
the police prevented the rally by force; in the end Mugabe 
did not address a rally in Kuwadzana on March 23. 
 
Harare MDC Mayor Threatened 
--------------------------- 
¶14. (U) On March 21 a mob of approximately 100 ZANU-PF 
supporters threatened Harare's MDC Mayor Elias Mudzuri 
chanting "you are a murderer and you will also be killed," as 
he walked to his car following a funeral ceremony at Heroes' 
Acre in full view of senior GOZ officials and police.  They 
confiscated the keys to Mudzuri's official vehicle; Mudzuri 
secured a spare set and returned home with a police escort 
but he continues to receive threats. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
¶15. (C) Although a GOZ campaign of retribution in the 
aftermath of the stayaway was already underway, President 
Mugabe's March 21 speech intensified the brutalization of MDC 
officials and supporters.  It is also clear that the security 
forces are either directly involved or, at a minimum, 
complicit in the ongoing GOZ crackdown.  End Comment. 
SULLIVAN