This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 007832 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/02/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM JO
SUBJECT: IAF MP COMPLAINS ABOUT U.S. MEPP POLICY, GOJ 
"DISCRIMINATION" 
 
REF: AMMAN 07507 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David Hale for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) PolCouns and PolOff met November 16 with Dr. Tayseer 
Fetyani, an MP from the Islamic Action Front (IAF).  Although 
Fetyani was cordial and talked about mutual understanding, he 
strongly criticized U.S. support of Israel and rejected 
arguments in support of U.S. peace process policies.  He also 
complained about GOJ "discrimination" against Islamists.  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------- 
BREAKING THE SILENCE 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) During a visit November 5 to the Parliament to meet 
with an Embassy contact, PolOff shared an elevator ride with 
IAF MP Dr. Tayseer al-Fetyani (West Banker, Amman - 2nd 
District).  PolOff introduced himself and engaged in polite 
small talk with him for several minutes.  Acting on an 
invitation from Fetyani, PolOff then went to Fetyani's office 
where he met Fetyani's son, a young doctor doing his 
residency in a Jordanian hospital.  Fetyani asked PolOff 
about obtaining a visa for his son to study in the U.S., but 
also said that he wanted to open a dialogue with the Embassy. 
 Fetyani recognized that the IAF had refused to talk with 
Embassy officers in the recent past, but said that in his 
opinion, it was important to "try to understand each other." 
PolOff welcomed Fetyani's offer of dialogue and agreed to 
arrange a follow-up meeting. 
 
---------------- 
A CAUTIOUS START 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) PolCouns and PolOff met with Fetyani in his office 
November 16 for more than one hour.  Fetyani was cordial and 
acknowledged the need for the IAF and the Embassy to talk to 
with one another.  The ensuing discussion covered several 
topics, including the IAF's cautiously optimistic impression 
of the new Jordanian government (see ref), but Fetyani was 
most concerned with the Middle East peace process.  Fetyani 
asserted that the IAF represents the true voice of the 
Jordanian people, who remain firmly opposed to relations with 
Israel and U.S. policy in the region, which they view as 
unfair and biased in favor of Israel. 
 
¶4.  (C) Although Fetyani tried to be polite throughout the 
meeting, he at times grew agitated and interrupted PolCouns 
to disagree with or refute what was being said.  He strongly 
defended Palestinian "resistance" in the face of Israeli 
"terror" against the Palestinian people.  He also rejected 
the idea that Arab nations and/or Arab organizations could 
influence U.S. policy, summarily saying that this was 
impossible.  Fetyani condemned U.S. military support to 
Israel, stating his conviction that this support permits 
Israel to continue its occupation "and kill Palestinian 
women, children, and elderly persons." 
 
------------------------ 
GOJ IS AGAINST ISLAMISTS 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (C) At several points in the conversation, Fetyani also 
complained about GOJ "discrimination" against Jordanian 
Islamists.  First, he said, even though PM Fayez had visited 
and opened a dialogue with the IAF,  party members were not 
included in the government or consulted on the GOJ's programs 
and decisions.  Second, he asserted, the GOJ actively 
discourages Islamists from taking positions or progressing in 
government, and "prevents" children of Islamists from getting 
government scholarships or positions in state universities. 
He also noted that GOJ security services keep a close watch 
on the Islamists, who believe that they are under observation 
and have their phones tapped.  In fact, he concluded, he was 
sure that the security services would contact him to ask why 
he had spoken with the Americans and what we had discussed. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Despite the strongly divergent views on the MEPP, the 
meeting was cordial and ended with a pledge to continue the 
dialogue.  Fetyani's focus on the need for Palestinian 
resistance to Israeli occupation mirrors that of the IAF's 
main constituents, urban Palestinian-Jordanians.  His 
unwillingness to look forward to the possibility of peaceful 
coexistence is disappointing, but also represents the view of 
many (if not most) Jordanians outside government. 
 
-------- 
BIO NOTE 
-------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Fetyani is a tall, slender man who appears to be in 
his 50s.  With his stature, long and slightly graying beard, 
and traditional Arab garb (except for a black leather bomber 
jacket), Fetyani bears an eerie resemblance to Osama bin 
Laden.  He studied and taught in Saudi Arabia for several 
years and holds a doctorate in Islamic studies from a Saudi 
university. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman or access the site 
through the State Department's SIPRNET home page. 
HALE