This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 007239 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ, MIDDLE EAST 
 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- A lead story in all papers today, November 5, 
focuses on the continued resistance in Iraq, with 
reports of five explosions in Baghdad as the 
resistance bombarded Bremer's headquarters for the 
second day, injuring four U.S. soldiers. Al-Dustour 
quoted Bush as having admitted that Saddam is 
responsible for the attacks and reported that Spain 
decided to temporarily withdraw its diplomats from 
Baghdad. All papers reported that Palestinian Prime 
Minister Ahmad Qurei is expected to present his new 
government to the Palestinian National Council next 
week. Meanwhile, Israeli Prime Minister Sharon 
reportedly failed to change Russia's stand on the road 
map. Al-Rai reported that Saudi authorities aborted an 
attack by Al Qaeda that targeted Umrah pilgrims in 
Mekkah. 
 
On the domestic front, Prime Minister Faisal Al-Fayez 
yesterday met with representatives of the Jordan Press 
Association and the Higher Media Council. During the 
meeting, Al-Fayez noted that the Jordanian media is 
strong but needs further development. In another 
report, Government Spokesperson Asma Khader announced 
that 25 Jordanian detainees in Israel will soon be 
released. 
 
             Editorial Commentary on Iraq 
 
-- "The Iraqi Resistance With and Without Saddam!" 
 
Daily columnist Bater Wardam writes on the op-ed page 
of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour 
(11/05): "Despite their statements, which reflect a 
true stupidity in dealing with Iraq, the Americans 
know how scared the Iraqis are from Saddam and so, 
continuing to pump the idea that Saddam is leading the 
resistance means that the Iraqis will continue to stay 
away from it. Moreover, a reward for the arrest or 
liquidation of Saddam will only materialize when the 
U.S. occupation gains full control over Iraqi 
resources in the interest of U.S. companies. . . Only 
then will the legend of Saddam will totally be 
dispensed with just like it was created in the first 
place." 
 
Wardam adds: "Saddam's disappearance means the spread 
of the Iraqi resistance within the social and 
political structure in Iraq, in which everyone will 
devote their time for the U.S. resistance and at last 
forget about the terror and fear that dwells inside 
them. Every patriotic Iraqi, i.e. every non Baathist 
and non agent for the U.S. occupation, will be able to 
take part in the comprehensive Iraqi resistance 
against the U.S. occupation, which will actually be a 
true resistance that only targets the U.S. army rather 
than international organizations and Iraqi civilians." 
 
Wardam concludes: "Saddam's disappearance means the 
departure of the Arab mentality from the illusions and 
the legend and its entrance into the world of truth 
and knowledge of the correct details behind the lies 
that are disseminated by media organs and politicians 
in the United States - lies that are believed by the 
Arabs who seek the illusion of heroism and the legend 
of the fighting brave leader. The legend of Saddam is 
like the legend of Osama Bin Laden - a mere morphine 
injection in the Arab mind and is a dispersion of true 
Arab efforts to resist U.S. supremacy and occupation 
of the region politically and culturally. The sooner 
those legends disappear the better it will be for the 
future of the Arabs and Iraq, in particular." 
 
        Editorial Commentary on the Middle East 
 
-- "The European Public Opinion and Israel: Peace and 
Anti-Semitism in a Poll" 
 
Commenting on the European public opinion poll,   semi- 
official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai (11/05) 
editorializes: "The results of the European poll are a 
clear indication that the free world condemns and 
denounces what the Government of Israel is committing 
in terms capital punishment and killings, the 
construction of dividing walls, racial segregations, 
the toppling of the peace process, and closure of any 
political door that leads to resolving the Palestinian- 
Israeli conflict. It is time for the leaders of Israel 
to review the files again instead of resorting to 
broken records and exhausted accusations that describe 
the world and public opinion as Anti-Semitic." GNEHM