This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 LAGOS 002579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DNG: CO 12/19/2013 
TAGS: PINR PINS MOPS PGOV EPET NI
SUBJECT: BIO ON WARRI NAVAL COMMANDER CAPTAIN O.B. OGUNJIMI 
 
REF: ABUJA NI 1445 
 
Classified By: J GREGOIRE FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (S N/F) On November 19, Poloff and Econoff met Captain 
Olufemi B. Ogunjimi, Commanding Officer (CO) of Nigerian 
Naval Station Delta (NNS Delta), headquartered in Warri, 
Delta State, at a forum discussing peace and security in the 
Niger Delta. 
 
¶2. (S N/F) Septel provides further context and background to 
place this potentially up-and-coming officer in a political 
environment with examples of how things really work in his 
world.  He is interesting not simply because he is the CO of 
the Naval base at Warri, but rather, because he is willing to 
talk rather openly about how politics and money play into his 
job as a military officer. 
 
¶3. (S N/F) On December 10, the same ConGen officers met with 
Ogunjimi at a restaurant in Lagos for a discussion on the 
situation in the Delta. Dressed casually in a loose shirt and 
slacks, Capt. Ogunjimi, a boyish looking, reserved man, 
described his home of origin only as "up there, far away from 
Lagos."  He noted he has a wife and children living on 
Victoria Island in Lagos, where he has kept a home for 16 
years, although he said he does not like the chaotic nature 
of the city. 
 
¶4. (S N/F) Ogunjimi told Poloff and Econoff that in the 
mid-1980s, as a Second Lieutenant based in Lagos, he 
conducted the first seizure in Nigeria of a vessel caught 
illegally bunkering oil.  Addressing a theme of  "political 
reality" he returned to throughout the conversation 
(septel), Ogunjimi said he was offered a bribe to release the 
vessel, which he claimed he turned over to his commanding 
officer.  Ogunjimi also said he quickly asked for a transfer 
when, on the day of the seizure, the men he arrested appeared 
at a restaurant in which he was eating and paid for his meal. 
 Ogunjimi said his transfer was approved, and added that the 
ship and crew were later released. 
 
¶5. (S N/F) As Commanding Officer of NNS Delta, Captain 
Ogunjimi said he commands a force of some 600 men, and 
reports to Rear Admiral Bob-Manuel, the Flag Officer 
Commanding (FOC) for the Western Naval Command (WNC) based in 
Apapa, Lagos.  Ogunjimi's command is a component of the 
Joint Task Force (JTF) Operation Restore Hope, established in 
August to coordinate military and security efforts in the 
Delta in response to violence between ethnic groups there and 
activities involving oil theft (reftel). Ogunjimi discussed 
with Mission officers his work over the last year, and the 
challenges he and his men face with what he described as 
inadequate equipment and limited resources.  He said the 
political pressures of working in the Delta are great, noting 
that he has learned to take vessels he seizes for illegal 
bunkering to Lagos, rather than to hold them at his base in 
Warri where pressure to release them is more direct.  He said 
that of the 10 ships he seized in eight months, two were 
ordered released by his superiors (septel). 
 
¶6. (S N/F) Ogunjimi said he approves of the Navy's policy of 
rotating Warri commanders in and out annually.  He says this 
practice should prevent them from becoming entrenched and 
corrupted by the political environment of the Delta, and will 
also keep them safe.  He half-jokingly referred to threats 
upon his life and said that for personal security he lives on 
the base when his family is not visiting (as do other JTF 
senior officers, he said). To maintain the appearance of 
impartiality and objectivity, the Captain said he does not 
make friends in the Warri community or spend much time there 
because to do so would immediately give rise to accusations 
of favoritism. 
 
¶7. (S N/F) Ogunjimi appeared satisfied with his performance 
at NNS Delta, but said he looks forward to his next posting 
as a Staff Officer at Naval Headquarters in Abuja.  He said 
his replacement, whom he did not name, should arrive at Warri 
on or about January 8. Ogunjimi will leave the post in 
mid-January. He said commanding the Warri base "would be a 
beautiful job, if not for the politics." Nonetheless, he said 
he would rather not command a Naval base again. 
 
¶8. (S N/F) COMMENT: If we can take him at his word and 
demeanor, as well as his command's recent public record, 
Captain Ogunjimi seems to be an honest officer interested in 
preserving security and upholding the rule of law.  Ogunjimi 
is probably a man to watch as he makes his way toward higher 
ranks.  He said he should be eligible for promotion to 
commodore within four years, after his tour at Naval HQ and a 
stint at the Nigerian War College. He would likely remain a 
good contact of the Mission if called upon. END COMMENT. 
HINSON-JONES