This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000183 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC 
SA/INS (FOR JWALLER); SA/PAB SA/RA (FOR SCENSNY) 
SA/PD LJIRWIN, WREINCKENS, SHOVANEC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP ECPS OEXC
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: State of the Union Address; 
Colombo 
 
Ref:  (A) SECSTATE 21822, (B) COLOMBO 0167, 
 (C) COLOMBO 0174 
 
¶1. "Flights of fancy?  We hope not" 
 
Independent English daily, Daily Mirror, commented (1/31): 
"The key phrase is `where it began'.  Yes, it all began in 
the United States, a country responsible for the mayhem 
that the world is in today and the coming cataclysm. 
 
"It is the United States lopsided policy that is denying a 
peaceful solution to the Palestinian crisis ... denying 
hundreds of millions of the world poor access to cheap and 
quality medicine ... has dealt a death blow to the Kyoto 
protocol on environment ... made the world criminal court 
ineffective ... made the United Nations a puppet or a 
talking shop ... brought the world to the verge of a third 
world war.  The list is longer, with human rights, 
international law, exploitation of the developing world in 
the name of globalisation and other key areas being 
included. 
 
"All this points to one thing -- the United States is 
responsible for the world disorder.  Hence, it all began 
`here in our country'.  Naturally, Bush did not see it in 
this light in his State of the Union address." 
 
 
¶2. "Will there be a US-Iraq war or not?" 
 
Independent Tamil daily, Virakesari (1/31) 
 
"According to President Bush's State of the Union address, 
America will bomb Iraq before the end of March.  This war 
is going to put an end to everything and President Bush 
says it cannot be averted. 
 
"Bush has roused Americans, citing a connection between 
Saddam's people and Al-Qaida rebels who attacked America, 
the policeman of the world, on September 11.  He has also 
said that proof is available and will be submitted at an 
appropriate time. 
 
"If war breaks out it will be a serious threat to our 
workers in the Middle East.  We will be unable to expect 
any employment in the region for well over a year.  The 
price of petroleum products will increase, and food will 
once again become scarce.  All of this will be a further 
burden on our people who at present are paying through 
their noses for their vegetables." 
 
WILLS