This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KUWAIT 000544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/M, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, IIP/G/NEA- 
SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, FEBRUARY 3-10: WAR AGAINST 
IRAQ; TERRORISM IN KUWAIT; US PRESENCE IN KUWAIT; SPACE 
SHUTTLE COLUMBIA; TRAVEL WARNING; REPATRIATION CASE. 
 
¶1. Summary: Support for US-led action against Iraq is strong 
despite being alloyed with rhetorical angst over Israel and 
other issues. The US presence in Kuwait is seen as necessary 
even after Saddam is removed, but one commentator also 
expresses embarrassment that "Kuwaiti soldiers are playing 
cards and drinking tea" while US troops prepare to defend 
Kuwait again. 
 
The space shuttle accident was politicized, with one writer 
chastising those who would gloat over it as revenge for US 
Middle East policy. Among the gloaters: a commentator who 
gleefully hopes that the association of Palestine, Texas 
will remind the West of the daily tragedy of "the other 
Palestine." 
 
Commentary on the repatriation of an American citizen 
teenager who also holds a Kuwaiti passport appears again, 
with the US Embassy accused of "bearing the greatest 
responsibility" for the violation of the Kuwaiti father's 
parental rights. End summary. 
 
¶2.  Al-Rai Al-Aam reported that the GOK is leaning towards 
imposing martial law. If implemented, the National Assembly 
would remain in session, and the government would commit 
itself "not to abuse its power." The Kuwait Lawyers 
Association opposes martial law, while former MP, Ali Al- 
Baghli, supports it "so that our American friends will not 
be vulnerable to enemies and Kuwaitis who support Al-Qaeda." 
The government will also seek National Assembly approval for 
a three-month temporary law allowing the government to hold 
suspects for 15 days instead of 4, if there is war against 
Iraq. 
 
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Sabah 
Al-Ahmed, denied allegations that schools would be closed 
after reports that two American schools have extended their 
mid-year break until March 22. President of Kuwait 
University, Dr. Al-Jallal, announced that the university 
would resume classes on February 15 as usual, but would 
issue departure forms for professors who wish to leave. 
 
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed is reported to have said that gas 
masks are "on the way" and will be available to the public. 
However, he is quoted as saying: "I'm one of those people 
that won't put one on." 
 
Al-Seyassa reported that the Kuwaiti military asked all 
private sector transportation companies to make their 
vehicles available for military use. The Ministry of Health 
requested that leave for doctors, nurses, and other health 
employees was suspended. 
 
All papers reported that the Kuwaiti military has declared 
two-thirds of Kuwait a restricted military zone starting 
February 15. Ministry of Interior investigation teams have 
reportedly started accompanying American military convoys 
for protection purposes. 
 
Minister of Defense, Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak, told the 
Kuwait News Agency that the GCC Defense Ministers meeting in 
Jeddah agreed to deploy a Peninsula Shield battalion to 
Kuwait to support Kuwaiti military units. 
 
Ministry of Information Assistant Under-Secretary for 
Foreign Media, Sheikh Mubarak Al-Duaij, in a radio interview 
in Beirut said: "The Kuwaiti government plans to build camps 
outside the border for Iraqi refugees. The Iraqi people and 
the Kuwait people are twins." It is reported that 2100 tents 
have been sent to the Kuwaiti-Iraqi border to be used by 
refugees and American forces. 
 
All papers reported Iraqi Prime Minister Tariq Aziz's 
retraction that in case of an armed conflict, Iraq "does not 
intend to attack Kuwait, but rather American forces in 
Kuwait." Elsewhere, Iraqi Vice President Ramadan threatened 
suicide attacks inside Iraq and abroad, specifically naming 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. 
 
National Assembly Speaker, Jassim Al-Khorafi, said in an 
interview with Reuters: "Democracy is a double-edged sword. 
If it is properly used, it is beneficial. If it is not, then 
it leads to chaos." On February 3, a lack of a quorum 
prevented the adjourning of the National Assembly. 
 
A court sentenced four Kuwaitis accused of being members of 
Al-Qaeda to five years in jail. Elsewhere, a Kuwaiti man was 
apprehended after a shotgun, ammunition and over 200 video 
cds showing "jihad" operations in Bosnia and Chechnya were 
found in his vehicle. 
 
Al-Seyassa asked religious and parliamentary figures, "When 
will we see an end to the attacks against U.S. forces in 
Kuwait?" Sample responses: 
--Islamist Kuwait University political science professor, 
Dr. Abdulla Sahar answered that these were individual acts 
that will disappear with the downfall of Saddam's regime. 
--Shiite MP, Abdul-Mohsen Yousef Jamal said it is not 
permitted to attack the forces that come to protect us. 
--Director of the Kuwait Center for Strategic Studies, Dr. 
Sami Al-Faraj answered that these are individual acts and do 
not reflect how the Kuwaiti society views the American 
presence here. 
 
All papers carried coverage of a press roundtable discussion 
with Ambassador David Mack, Vice President of the Middle 
East Institute, on the Iraq crisis. 
 
¶3. "Let Us Share Their Tragedy" 
Dr. Naji Al-Ziad wrote in independent Al-Qabas (2/3):  "I 
was very sorry to hear about the tragic loss of the American 
astronauts and the space shuttle. Unfortunately, some 
believe that America-- the enemy of Islam and of Muslims, as 
they perceive it-- deserves such a punishment. . The death 
of astronauts in the interest of science should not be a 
chance to take revenge. We have to stand side by side with 
them, just as they stood with us during our crisis in 1990." 
 
¶4. "A Message to the American Ambassador" 
Qais Al-Ustta wrote in independent Al-Qabas (2/3):  "Many 
Kuwaitis have good relations with the American Ambassador to 
Kuwait, Richard Jones. The Ambassador realizes that 99% of 
Kuwaitis consider America a friend to Kuwait. On the other 
hand, American citizens and the American government believe 
that attacks on American soldiers have increased, and that 
puts the Ambassador in between. I write to you as a humble 
citizen to tell you that your presence in Kuwait is 
something we welcome, and to stress to you that Kuwait will 
remain a safe haven for our American friends." 
 
¶5. "America is at its Best" 
Osam Safar wrote in independent Al-Qabas (2/3): "Those who 
believe that the American role [in the Middle East] will end 
after a new Iraqi government is established are mistaken. 
Frankly, the need for a powerful nation such as the US will 
not end, and we will not encourage them to leave Kuwait. 
until another powerful nation like the US emerges." 
 
¶6.  "The American Palestine" 
Islamist Adel Al-Qassar wrote in independent Al-Qabas (2/4): 
"The destiny of the Israeli space astronaut Iian Ramon ended 
in a small town called Palestine in Texas. We hope that the 
West would remember the Eastern Palestine and the massacres 
that Israel commits against the Palestinian people. We also 
wish the Western Palestine would realize the tragedies of 
the Arab Palestine. We also hope that the US will give more 
Arab names to its regions." 
 
¶7.  "Before the Strike Begins" 
Waleed Al-Ahmad wrote in independent Al-Anba (2/3): "We know 
that at one time Saddam Hussein served the interests of the 
US, but now, Saddam has become useless. We also fully 
realize that the current situation has benefited Israel. 
which seems to be at the peak of its joy because the Iraqi 
crisis has diverted the attention of the world away from the 
terrorist acts perpetrated by Israel against the 
Palestinians. We also realize it is useless to call on the 
Arab world to solve the crisis. Therefore, we must support 
US efforts to oust Saddam's regime." 
 
¶8. Independent Al-Qabas published (2/5) an interview with 
Dr. Ahmad Al-Baghdadi, liberal Political Science professor 
at Kuwait University, as part of a series of interviews with 
prominent Kuwaiti figures discussing extremism in Kuwait: 
"When I ask for the closure of the Faculty of Sharia, this 
does not mean that I am calling for the elimination of 
religious education for children and youths. I want this 
education to continue in the mainstream system so that those 
extremists will not have the chance to join such 
institutions and teach our children this extremism. 
[T]raditional Salafi thinking distinguishes between the 
infidel from the believer as the latter having the right to 
everything and the former to nothing in the land of Islam. 
Therefore, any kind of support to the infidels-- and here we 
talking directly about the question of American military 
presence in Kuwait and the [Arabian] Peninsula-- would not 
be acceptable." 
 
¶9.  "An Open Letter to President Bush" 
Noriyah Al-Sadani wrote in Independent Al-Rai Al-A'am (2/8): 
"Your authorization for your citizens to leave Kuwait has 
made us fearful of what will happen, and what kind of new 
weapons will be used. What precautions have you taken for 
the safety of our homeland and those living in Kuwait? . I 
pray for the safety of your officers and soldiers who are 
present in Kuwait, and for the safety of all people in 
Kuwait. The noble objective of this war is to remove Saddam. 
but what happens after that?" 
 
¶10. Mohammad Musaid Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(2/9):  "A friend of mine informed me that while driving 
recently to his farm, he passed American and British 
military vehicles heading to locations to defend Kuwait. 
Later, my friend saw some Kuwait soldiers playing cards and 
drinking tea. My friend is wondering if it is reasonable for 
the Americans and the British to do their duties while the 
Kuwaitis are playing cards and drinking tea? We should not 
ask for the help of foreign soldiers when Kuwait is in 
danger. Kuwaitis must defend their country. Foreign powers 
are not willing to defend us every time Kuwait is in 
danger." 
 
¶11. "The Tragedy of a Father and his Daughter: Who is 
Responsible?" 
Mallallah Yousef Mallallah wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(2/9):  "The Ministry of Education, the Ministry of 
Interior, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of 
Communication and the American Embassy in Kuwait were all 
involved in the kidnapping of a Kuwaiti child from Kuwait 
and transporting her to the US. The Embassy of a great and 
powerful nation should not have got involved in this case 
because there are legal, diplomatic and other legitimate 
ways to solve this issue. One would ask, how did the girl 
leave the school and how did she go to the American Embassy? 
. Whose responsibility is it at the Ministry of Interior for 
not opening a missing child case at the police station? How 
could the Ministry of Foreign Affairs participate in the 
kidnapping of a Kuwaiti citizen? Why did the country ignore 
the basic constitutional rights of a Kuwaiti citizen? The 
Ministry of Communication is also responsible in this case 
because it controls the borders.  The American Embassy bears 
the greatest responsibility for the father and the daughter. 
Why didn't they find another way to solve this case? What 
about the fate of the innocent child? . If any citizen has 
any problem, he usually asks for the help of the government 
and its institutions, but what does he do if the government 
is involved in the crime? I personally know the honesty of 
Mr. Al-Saffar and I call on him to try all legal and 
legitimate ways to solve his case, because if we keep silent 
about his case, then we will not feel safe and secure in our 
own country." 
 
URBANCIC