This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000458 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (FOR JWALLER); SA/PD LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, WREINCKENS; 
SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO KMDR OPRC OIIP CE
SUBJECT: MEDIA PLAY: IRAQ 
 
 
¶1. Independent English daily says that the "ides of Bush" 
indicate "the creation of a new god who demands that all 
other nations must worship him and subscribe to his 
policies...." 
 
Under the headline "`The hour has come!' the ides of Bush," 
the DAILY MIRROR (independent English daily, islandwide 
circulation) wrote on 3/19:  "Not only in the war against 
Iraq, but in tackling future conflicts, it would be the US 
and its allies that take the major decisions instead of the 
UN Security Council....  Since the fall of the Soviet 
Empire ... the US and its allies, including the big 
transnational corporations, have been running, ruling, 
controlling or manipulating virtually the whole world 
through economic means.  Now they are coming out openly and 
imposing world domination by force of arms.  ... what is 
happening is virtually the creation of a new god who 
demands that all other nations must worship him and 
subscribe to his policies....  Any country that does not 
bow in worship before this new god or beast cannot survive. 
They will be denied access to proper health, education, 
jobs and economic facilities if they do not carry the card 
or the number of the new god or beast...." 
 
¶2. Opposition Sinhala daily finds it "difficult to 
understand Bush's real objective 
 
Under "After twelve midnight," the 3/19 issue of DIVAINA 
(opposition Sinhala daily, islandwide circulation) 
commented:  "It is very difficult to understand Bush's real 
objective....  Perhaps he wants genuinely to destroy WMDs 
in Iraq or perhaps he wants an American pawn in charge of 
Iraq in order to control access to oil.  Perhaps he holds a 
personal grudge....  These goals can be realized only by 
disarming Iraq." 
 
¶3. Independent Tamil daily says neither Bush nor Saddam is 
listening to the international community. 
 
Under "Threat of War" the VIRAKESARI (independent Tamil 
daily, islandwide circulation) editorialized on 3/19: 
"People in their hundreds of thousands have shown their 
opposition by taking part in demonstrations and rallies. 
However, the U.S. is not listening to the collective voice 
of the international community and Iraq is also ready to 
face the war.  War can start at any moment." 
 
Wills