This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 004612 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR FSI/SLS, FSI/SLS FOR COSSICH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AFSI AMGT AFIN APER KFLO
SUBJECT: 2004 POST LANGUAGE PROGRAM DIRECT FUNDING - KUWAIT 
 
REFTEL:   STATE 260769 
 
¶1.  Post wishes to continue the momentum of the 2003 Post 
Language program and expand the program in to two tiers: 
Beginning and Intermediate.  The primary users are still those 
who have not had the opportunity to formally study the 
language.  The Intermediate class will include Officers, 
Specialists and Marine Guards who have had some beginning 
training at FSI or here in country.  The Intermediate class 
will use a different book and audio cassette.  In addition the 
one-on-one tutoring has been beneficial when requested.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  Proposal.  A mentor/teacher will work with the Assilsilah- 
Arabic for Foreigners workbooks and audiocassettes along with 
material from Kuwait daily living, including newspapers, 
magazines, menus, etc, to provide lessons to beginning Arabic 
speakers twice a week.  Additionally using a more advanced 
workbook and audiocassette level will develop an intermediate 
class at the minimum of once a week.  One-on-One tutoring will 
be available as needed.  In addition the teacher may use 
software for learning Arabic writing one-on-one at a computer 
station, or with the projector available in the language room. 
The teacher will continue to be available for questions about 
pronunciation, grammar and dialect specific to Kuwait and Gulf 
Arabic in general. 
 
¶3.  Cost.  Based on local rates, and the current pay schedule, 
Post estimates that a one-year cost for providing guided study 
will be approximately USD 6,500.  This figure includes the cost 
of 2X to 3X weekly, on-site classes by the teacher (USD 5,500), 
purchase of beginning study guides for new students, and the 
start up purchase of the intermediate study guides (USD 700), 
and additional software copies and miscellaneous expenses to 
cover supplemental teaching materials as needed (USD 300). 
 
¶4.  Background notes.  The Post language program has been a 
success here, and is a huge morale booster for employees, 
marines and EFM's who otherwise have received no Arabic 
training.  Tension continues in the region and the more our 
assigned personnel use basic Arabic skills in the local 
community is greatly appreciated.  As we develop an 
intermediate level class we can reach even more personnel with 
minimal cost. 
 
¶5.  Post Language Officer and point of contact for the program: 
Gene DelBianco, 965-539-5307, extension 2533 (office), 965-538- 
0282 Fax.  Points of contact for this proposal on behalf of Mr. 
DelBianco, Human Resources Officer Cassandra Hamblin (ext: 
2592), or Political Officer Joe Porto (ext: 2690).  We thank 
you for your consideration of our proposal. 
JONES