This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PLEASE PASS SABA GHORI, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV ELAB KDEM KSEP XE XF XM JO
SUBJECT: EMBASSY AMMAN'S HUMAN RIGHTS STRATEGY 
 
REF: SECSTATE 13796 
 
¶1.  (U) Per reftel, Post is providing the following report on 
actions taken by the USG in Jordan during 2002. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Begin text: 
 
Introduction 
 
Our human rights strategy in Jordan seeks to promote human 
rights through a) direct dialogue with the Jordanian 
Government and others, b) programs aimed at fostering 
elements of human rights, and c) reporting on human rights 
activity in Jordan. 
 
¶A.   Dialogue with the Jordanian Government and others 
 
      The US Embassy in Amman promotes human rights, 
democracy and the rule of law with the Jordanian Government 
on a regular basis.  We have a strong, multi-faceted 
relationship with Jordan, and human rights issues are an 
essential component.  Our frank dialogue with the Government 
has yielded progress.  Partly in response to the Embassy's 
frequent approaches on human rights issues, the Government 
announced in late 2002 the creation of a new Human Rights 
Directorate within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and is 
planning to train diplomats at U.S. institutions of higher 
education during 2003.  Aside from the new Directorate, the 
Government in January 2003 announced a forthcoming Human 
Rights Commission, which the Government has indicated will be 
independent and have regulatory authority. 
 
      Aside from the Jordanian Government, we also meet 
regularly with local NGOS, UN officials and human rights 
officers of European nations, Canada and the European Council. 
 
      On labor issues we maintain an ongoing dialogue with 
key actors in the labor sector, including the GOJ, labor 
union leaders, International Labor Organization (ILO) 
officials, industrial park managers and factory owners.  A 
primary focus is the Qualifying Industrial Zones (QIZs), in 
which we encourage all parties to maintain acceptable labor 
standards for Jordan's growing textile industry.  We note 
that in 2002, labor conditions in the QIZs were generally 
good with a trend toward improvement. 
 
¶B.  Embassy Programs 
 
i.  Public Diplomacy Programs 
 
      The Embassy funds programs to promote human rights 
through the Public Diplomacy Section, the cumulative value of 
which exceeded 100,000 USD in 2002. 
 
Ongoing judicial reform projects involve a visitors exchange 
program for judges and judicial experts.  Judicial reform is 
particularly important as Jordan is now a member of the WTO 
and enjoys a free trade agreement with the United States.  We 
also fund English language training of Jordanian judges to 
broaden the range of information and contacts available to 
them.  We fund an ongoing series of visits and locally based 
training programs for Jordanian journalists and editors, and 
translate "best practices" materials for journalists.  In the 
area of Women and Democracy, we fund projects for women's 
advocacy, training of female candidates to run for elected 
office, and training staff and volunteers for such campaigns. 
 We plan to continue our training program for women through 
the forthcoming parliamentary elections of 2003.  Finally, in 
the area of civic education, we are supporting the 
translation of a civic education textbook that the Ministry 
of Education plans to use in an upcoming pilot project in 
Jordanian schools. 
 
In October the Post sponsored a conference for civic 
education activists from a dozen Arab countries, including 
Jordan, who have founded "Arab Civitas", an NGO aimed at 
strengthening civic education in schools and universities 
throughout the Arab world. 
 
Public Affairs and USAID plan on signing a PASA agreement 
funding human rights and democracy activities in coordination 
with an interagency committee at Post. 
 
ii.  USAID Programs 
 
USAID programs address human rights issues by promoting a 
transparent, efficient and responsive public sector through 
good governance, legal reform, and improvement of civic 
institutions. 
 
The good governance program, at work throughout Jordan, is 
aimed at improving the ability of Jordanians to influence 
public policy.  The program focuses on, among other things, 
establishing E-government and judicial reform.  The budget 
for good governance programs in 2002 exceeded 4 million USD. 
USAID programs work to increase the advocacy ability of 
business associations and NGOs.  USAID provides technical 
assistance to private sector and civil society, (focusing in 
large part on women's business groups and organizations) 
which seek to participate in public policy making.  The 2002 
budget for these programs was approximately 400,000 USD. 
 
Throughout its 2002 programs USAID supported women in areas 
such as economic participation (1,000,000 USD), access to 
health care (12,000,000 USD) and poverty alleviation 
(1,300,000 USD). 
¶C.  Human Rights Reporting 
 
      In addition to the annual Human Rights Report and 
International Religious Freedom Report, the Embassy regularly 
reports human rights developments via the political and 
public diplomacy sections.  During the year, we reported on 
developments in specific cases, such as Toujan Faisal's 
conviction in the State Security Court and subsequent pardon, 
and general developments in areas such as honor killings and 
improved labor conditions at the Qualifying Industrial Zones. 
 For more information on these and other cases, please see 
our annual Human Rights Report. 
 
GNEHM