This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 001844 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FAA LONDON FOR JOSEPH TEIXERA 
STATE FOR EB/TRA FOR M.WALKLET AND S.PARSON 
USEU FOR J.KESSLER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON NL ENIV
SUBJECT: AIRCRAFT NOISE:  DUTCH PARLIAMENT RAISES NEW 
CONCERNS ABOUT SCHIPHOL 
 
 
¶1.     Summary.  The Dutch parliament is reviewing aircraft 
noise levels in response to pressure from communities in the 
area of Amsterdam Schiphol Airport.  Sleep disturbances have 
increased as the 5th runway has come on line.  It remains to 
be seen whether or not the study will lead to a change in 
regulations, but it is likely that if the debate were to 
continue, it will pose a challenge to advocates of further 
airport expansion.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.     A study of airport noise commissioned by the Dutch 
Second Chamber revealed a significant increase in sleep 
disturbances as a result of airport expansion.  The findings 
may lead to changes in limits set for air travel at 
Amsterdam's airport.  The Second Chamber is frequently the 
target of lobbying by city councils in townships surrounding 
Amsterdam Schiphol Airport who have opposed plans to expand 
the airport.  The latest study, conducted by the Royal 
Institute of Health and Environmental, measured the degree of 
sleep disturbance among a sample population.  It found a 
significant increase since the 2002 opening of the airport's 
fifth runway.  Developers of the new runway originally 
claimed its addition to the airport would reduce sleep 
disturbances in the region.  The findings of the environment 
and health study will be paired with an economic impact 
study, and the package will be presented to the Second 
Chamber for review.  The Parliament will then make a 
recommendation for whether or not to change standing 
regulations on air traffic.  Dutch regulations set a ceiling 
for the total number of "sleep-disturbed residents" in the 
Schiphol area, in addition to limiting night flights and 
specifying flight paths, 
 
¶3.     Maryanne Heijman of the Environmental Division of the 
Civil Aviation Authority said the Transport Ministry hopes 
economic factors will receive full consideration as the 
Second Chamber considers the noise abatement issue.  Heijman 
predicts that there will be no change in the regulations 
governing noise restrictions until at least 2006, but she 
does expect the discussion to continue within the Chamber, 
among community organizations, and in the press.  News of the 
study has put the issue back on the front pages of Dutch 
newspapers. 
 
¶4.     Comment:  The airport's rapid growth over the past 10 
years, coupled with industrial development in the "Amsterdam 
Airport Area", are significant drivers of the Netherlands' 
economy.  Schiphol just finished a major expansion phase and 
has further plans for increasing commercial air business in 
the near future.  The Ministry of Transport and its private 
sector allies argue that continued development of the airport 
-- services and facilities -- is key to the country's future 
competitiveness and economic growth.  The noise pollution 
issue could undermine their expansion campaign.  But whether 
or not it will reignite debate over aircraft standards (read 
hushkits) remains to be seen.  End Comment. 
RUSSEL