This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, SA/PAB, SA/RA, S/CT 
NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  06-25-13 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER CE IN PK
SUBJECT:  Sri Lankan MFA views on Indo-Pakistani 
relations within SAARC 
 
(U) Classified by Donald Camp, Charge d'Affaires. 
Reasons 1.5 (b, d). 
 
¶1.  (C) During separate June 24 meetings with Charge 
focused on other subjects, Foreign Secretary Nihal 
Rodrigo and MFA Additional Secretary for SAARC Sarala 
Fernando touched on current Indo-Pakistani relations 
within SAARC.  (Note:  Rodrigo is the former head of the 
SAARC Secretariat in Kathmandu.)  They made the 
following key points: 
 
--  The scheduled July 9-10 foreign secretaries meeting 
in Kathmandu is intended to focus on a protocol to 
SAARC's convention on counterterrorism.  Fernando stated 
that the protocol is meant to address post-9/11 
counterterrorism issues, thus updating SAARC's 
convention on the issue.  Each interlocutor described 
the protocol as dealing with issues of terrorist 
financing and "practical" issues on a regional basis. 
Rodrigo said MFA legal advisor Rohan Perera has had 
informal discussions re the protocol with India and 
Pakistan in an effort to prevent Indo-Pakistan 
disagreement over interpretations of "terrorism" and, 
thus, help ensure a productive meeting.  (Note:  Perera 
is in Washington this week and plans to discuss the 
protocol at the Department.)  Rodrigo and Fernando also 
thought that the upcoming July 9-10 meeting could be 
successful if the discussion remained at the working 
technical level, excluding politics. 
 
--  Fernando further thought that if the July Kathmandu 
meeting went well, there would be the usual SAARC 
ministerial meeting taking place on the UNGA sidelines 
in September.  She added that success at these two 
meetings might even lead to a follow-on summit.  The 
Indians had made clear to the GSL, however, that they 
would not commit too far in advance to any specific 
summit date over worry of a possible terrorist attack. 
 
--  Related to a possible summit, the Indian government 
was also uneasy re head of state attendance, wanting to 
avoid the possibility of an awkward Vajpayee-Musharraf 
encounter, preferring a Vajpayee-Jamali meeting.  With 
some confidence, Fernando said Pakistan had informally 
agreed to be represented at the summit by Prime Minister 
Jamali, thereby addressing India's concern. 
 
¶2.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
CAMP