This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 005317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, IIP/G/NEA-SA, 
  INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, NOVEMBER 15-19: TIMETABLE FOR IRAQI 
SOVEREIGNTY; DEMOCRACY; TERRORISM; WOMEN'S RIGHTS 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Reaction to the timetable for transfer of 
sovereignty in Iraq has been limited to one editorial that 
ties the decision to the upcoming US presidential elections. 
 
Commentary on democratization in the region reflects a lack 
of faith in regional governments to carry out reforms, but 
also criticism of the US for supporting these "dictatorial 
regimes." A prominent liberal commentator criticizes US 
support of Kuwait, stating that "if America believes that 
Kuwait is a model for democracy then it is lying and this 
signifies that it still supports tyrannical regimes."  One 
writer states that democratic reforms are an "obligation" of 
GCC governments in order to fight the rise in terrorism. A 
conservative Islamist opines that the US exports a 
"democracy of homosexuals and pornography." 
 
Arabic daily al-Seyassah reported on November 18 that 200 
female students in a Kuwaiti school were expelled for not 
wearing a headscarf. Several MPs strongly denounced the 
expulsions. The daily reports Ministry of Education sources 
as saying that "only 12 students" were expelled, and that 
they are looking into the issue. 
 
Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad announced this week 
that a bill on women's rights would be introduced to the 
National Assembly. A prominent Islamist MP stated that he 
was not against women's suffrage, but drew the line on women 
in public office. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News stories:  On November 15, Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that 
Prime Minister Sabah Al-Ahmad stated: "women's political 
rights will be reintroduced again to the National Assembly." 
On November 16, "a parliamentary source" stated that the 
National Assembly will grant women political rights in 2003, 
according to Al-Anba. Al-Anba also reports that Islamist MP 
Waleed Al-Tabtabie said he was not against granting women 
the right to vote, but rather against granting them the 
right to run for office. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on its November 16 front page that the 
Economic Committee of the Council of Ministers (Cabinet) is 
discussing proposals on a new taxation law, quoting an 
"informed source" as saying: "Kuwaitis should realize that 
the taxes are coming." 
 
The Ministry of Interior has formed a committee to study the 
causes of the recent resignation of 250 senior officials and 
other workers at the Ministry, according to Al-Anba. 
 
According to an "Iraqi security source," 400,000 cars have 
been exported from Kuwait to Iraq since the fall of Saddam's 
regime, Al-Anba reports. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3. "Behind the American Decision" 
Dr. Yasser Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(11/18):  "President Bush announced the transfer of 
sovereignty to the Iraqi people could be achieved prior to 
writing a new Iraqi constitution. The real reason for Bush's 
decision to expedite the transfer of authority to the Iraqis 
is his fear of losing the upcoming presidential elections in 
2004." 
 
¶4.  "America is Coming For Those Who Do Not Practice 
Democracy" 
Liberal Dr. Ahmad Al-Baghdadi wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (11/15):  "It is a tragedy for America to 
financially and militarily assist [some repressive Arab] 
regimes and then also attempt to reinstate the dignity of 
the people, which these regimes have violated. The President 
must realize that Islamic groups are the main reason for the 
political tyranny in the Arab and Islamic worlds, and that 
as long as they are destroying our social, political and 
intellectual balance, then any call for reforms will 
useless." 
 
¶5.  "Human Rights Violations" 
Liberal Director of the Center for Strategic and Future 
Studies at Kuwait University, Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in 
independent Al-Seyassah (11/15):  "A human rights report 
recently published in Washington states that most of the 
victims of human rights violations in Kuwait are from South 
East Asian countries. This nothing new since local and 
international human rights organizations have repeatedly 
criticized Kuwait for violating human rights. I believe that 
external pressure on Kuwait may be the solution to this 
problem since Arab leaderships are not used to listening to 
their own people." 
 
¶5.  "The Enemies of Democracy" 
Liberal Dr. Ahmad Al-Baghdadi wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (11/19):  "How can any democracy develop without 
intellectual freedom? If American believes that Kuwait is a 
model for democracy then it is lying and this signifies that 
American still supports tyrannical regimes. America should 
read the new press and publication law to realize the amount 
of intellectual terrorism present in Kuwaiti law. If the US 
is serious about implementing democracy in the Middle East, 
then it must not support regimes with fake constitutions or 
parliaments." 
 
¶6.  "Democracy or Terrorism" 
Liberal Director of the Center for Strategic and Future 
Studies at Kuwait University, Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in 
independent Al-Seyassah (11/17):  "Due to increased violence 
and terrorism in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states, it is 
no longer acceptable to delay political and economic 
reforms. The GCC countries have not yet realized that 
adopting democracy is no longer an option, but rather an 
obligation." 
 
¶7.  "When Will We Be Prepared?" 
Dr. Abdullah Al-Hamadi wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(11/19):  "Muslim extremist are responsible for giving the 
bad impression that Islam rejects democracy. The ultimate 
goal of democracy is to allow Arabs and Muslims to live a 
decent life in which justice and freedom prevails. The Iraqi 
people have a golden opportunity to form a true democratic 
government, unlike most of the democracies in the Arab 
world. 
 
¶8.  "This is Our Mother America" 
Conservative Islamist Mohammad Al-Mulaifi wrote in 
independent Al-Seyassah (11/16):  "Two articles were 
published in the newspapers last week: one celebrated the 
opening of a school for homosexuals in New York, and the 
another described the election of the first homosexual 
bishop in the Anglican Church. this is the kind of democracy 
which our mother American is attempting to spread to Iraq 
and Afghanistan-the democracy of homosexuals and 
pornography. 
 
URBANCIC