This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T KATHMANDU 002254 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR SA 
LONDON FOR POL - GURNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/17/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC PREL NP IN UK
SUBJECT: WARNING NEPAL'S MAOISTS AGAIN AGAINST THREATENING 
AMCITS 
 
REF: A. KATHMANDU 2246 
 
     ¶B. KATHMANDU 2163 
     ¶C. KATHMANDU 1461 
     ¶D. STATE 219519 
 
Classified By: AMB. MICHAEL E. MALINOWSKI.  REASON:  1.5 (B, D). 
 
¶1. (S/NF) Summary: In view of the increased intensity and 
frequency of verbal threats by Nepal's Maoists against U.S. 
citizens and interests, the Embassy requests Department 
permission to attempt to send another message to the Maoist 
leadership through a reliable intermediary, warning them to 
desist.  Embassy asks that the Department also consider 
instructing Embassies London and New Delhi to strongly 
request their respective host governments to send parallel 
messages to their covert contacts in the Maoist leadership. 
End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Since unilaterally breaking off the ceasefire on 
August 27, Maoist insurgents have steadily intensified their 
anti-American rhetoric--from statements posted on their 
official website, to e-mails sent to local media outlets, to 
slogans painted on walls in remote rural communities.  The 
specific threats against Peace Corps trainees in Rupandehi 
District (Ref A), the exclusion of USG-sponsored assistance 
programs from the Maoists' purported new policy of 
cooperation with foreign donors (Ref B), and reporting in 
other channels of a possible Maoist public demand that all 
USG personnel leave Nepal indicate an alarming rise in both 
the volume and frequency of anti-American messages.  We 
believe the threats are part of a Maoist strategy to isolate 
us diplomatically from other donors and force us to close 
down our extensive, long-standing and highly successful 
bilateral development assistance to the Government of Nepal. 
The anti-US public relations campaign is also likely intended 
to divert attention from--and provide a convenient excuse 
for--the Maoists' lack of military success in the field since 
the resumption of hostilities.  While we note that the 
Maoists to date have never acted on any of these numerous 
threats, their insistent repetition is cause for the utmost 
concern. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF) Action Request:  The Embassy believes the threats 
against US citizens and interests warrant re-engaging with 
the Maoists on several levels to stress USG concern at the 
rhetoric and to warn again of possible repercussions if the 
threats continue.  We request Department permission to 
attempt to pass such a message to the Maoist leadership 
through a trusted intermediary.  Suggested talking points 
follow below.  Embassy also requests that the Department 
instruct our Embassies in New Delhi and London to ask their 
respective host governments to communicate a similar message 
to their covert Maoist contacts. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Suggested Talking Points: 
 
--The protection of US citizens and interests is the USG's 
most important interest in Nepal and around the world. 
 
--The USG regards threats against its citizens as a matter of 
the gravest concern and treats all such threats--and those 
who issue them--as hostile. 
 
--We must interpret Maoist threats as expressions of intent 
to endanger our citizens. 
 
--The USG will hold the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) and 
its leaders responsible for any harm that may befall our 
citizens or personnel as a result of such threats and will 
take all appropriate action. 
 
End text of suggested talking points. 
 
MALINOWSKI