This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/11/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ TU
SUBJECT: CAPSTONE DELEGATION DISCUSSES US-TURKEY RELATIONS, 
IRAQ, SYRIA WITH MFA DEPUTY UNDERSECRETARY 
 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Charge d'Affaires a.i. Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶2. (C) The participants in the National Defense University 
CAPSTONE European Field Studies Program, accompanied by 
representatives from ODC, DAO, and the pol-mil affairs 
section of the Embassy, met with MFA Deputy U/S Baki Ilkin on 
August 6 to discuss a broad range of issues. The meeting was 
conducted in a question and answer format, with the CAPSTONE 
participants posing questions pertaining to the state of 
US-Turkey relations, Turkish support for the reconstruction 
and stabilization of Iraq, the state of relations between 
Syria and Turkey, and the focus of GOT policy efforts in the 
upcoming year. 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
US-TURKEY RELATIONS HAVE A BRIGHT FUTURE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Ilkin, speaking candidly, said that both the US and 
Turkey have made mistakes recently in terms of their 
bilateral affairs. He contrasted the current state of 
relations with the atmosphere between the two sides 
immediately following September 11. However, he stressed that 
US-Turkey relations extend far beyond the situation in Iraq. 
He pointed to shared interests in Central Asia, the strong 
desire on both sides to bring about a peaceful settlement 
between Israel and the Palestinians, and the need to put 
pressure on both Syria and Iran to become responsible members 
of the international community. 
 
 
---------------------- 
GOT ASSISTANCE TO IRAQ 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ilkin pointed out too that, despite a number of 
problems between the US and Turkey over Iraq, Turkey has also 
provided a significant amount of assistance to the 
reconstruction and stabilization of Iraq, and will continue 
to do so in the future. Success in Iraq bolsters Turkish 
national security, Ilkin said. The GOT plans to participate 
in the upcoming donors conference for Iraq, though it is 
unclear if it will be able to provide financial assistance. 
 
 
¶5. (C) In addition, the GOT recognizes that US troops in Iraq 
need to be relieved, Ilkin said, and believes the Iraqi 
Stabilization Force should have a truly international 
composition, which will accord it much more legitimacy. The 
GOT supports the proposal to send Turkish troops to Iraq and 
is working actively to secure the approval of Parliament and 
the public for this deployment. At the same time, he admitted 
that the GOT is unsure if Parliament will approve this 
proposal. Ilkin also said that the GOT understands Turkey 
would have its own zone of responsibility within Iraq, if it 
decides to deploy troops. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Ilkin stressed that the GOT has no problem working 
with the Iraqi Governing Council, but the Arab League 
approach didn't accord the Council much legitimacy. The Iraqi 
people and Arab governments in the region must see Iraq as 
being governed by Iraqis, not Americans, Ilkin said. 
 
 
---------------------- 
TURKEY-SYRIA RELATIONS 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) Ilkin noted that Turkey and Syria had gone through a 
difficult period when the latter was harboring and providing 
assistance to PKK ringleaders. The two were on the verge of a 
military confrontation, when Syria forced the PKK leaders to 
leave the country. 
 
 
¶8. (C) President Assad has spent a great deal of time in the 
West and must conclude that Syria's future lies in that 
direction, as well as that his father's policies were wrong, 
Ilkin said. Ilkin had expected that Assad would dismiss some 
of his father's advisors after he assumed power, but this has 
not happened unfortunately. 
 
 
¶9. (C) Ilkin pointed out that the GOT has stressed to Syrian 
leaders that they have a strong interest in developing better 
relations with the US, must not turn a blind eye to the 
presence of terrorist groups within Syria, and must provide 
full support to the Middle East peace process. He also 
stressed that the USG must continually reiterate these 
messages to the Syrian government. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
FOCUS OF THE GOT IN THE COMING YEAR 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶10. (C) Ilkin said that the GOT will focus on the following 
issues over the next year: implementing the recently approved 
reform packages, setting a date with the EU to begin 
accession negotiations, maintaining good relations with both 
the US and the EU, contributing to the stability of Iraq, 
facilitating the Middle East peace process, and continuing 
the improvement of Turkey-Russia relations. 
 
 
¶11. (U) The CAPSTONE delegation did not have an opportunity 
to clear this message. 
DEUTSCH