This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002070 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL AMGT JO
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: JORDANIAN FSNS AND THE WAR NEXT DOOR 
 
REF: SANAA 607 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR EDWARD W. GNEHM, REASONS 1.5 B AND D 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  As in Sanaa (reftel), the FSNs at the 
U.S. Mission in Amman are experiencing societal pressures 
and some personal doubts about working for the USG as a 
result of the war with Iraq. A recent news article 
implying that some FSNs effectively are spying on 
demonstrators for the Embassy was particularly disturbing 
to them. The Post FSN committee has expressed FSN worries 
about life-insurance restrictions should they be 
killed in a war-related or terrorist incident and has 
asked about establishing a "danger pay" for FSNs working 
at the Embassy.  Meanwhile, rising anti-American 
sentiments have resulted in some vendors and landlords 
refusing to work with the Embassy now. Even some 
professional-level contacts are shying away from 
association with the Embassy. The Regional Medical Officer 
recently was advised by close Jordanian medical colleagues 
to stay away from the hospital principally used by the 
Embassy because they feared for his personal safety. As 
the war in Iraq and the Intifada go on, pressures on our 
FSN employees to disassociate themselves from the Embassy 
are likely to grow. End summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  The referenced telegram from Sanaa struck a chord 
with us here in Amman where our FSNs are experiencing 
similar pressures and concerns now that the battle has 
been joined in Iraq.  Many FSNs have expressed the 
increasing discomfort they feel due to their association 
with the Embassy. This includes hearing disparaging remarks 
from friends and family members, some of whom have 
encouraged them to quit working for the Americans.  Some 
have noted that they feel very uncomfortable calling 
Jordanian contacts and requesting meetings or information. 
One pointed to a small news article published in the most 
recent edition of As-Sabeel -- the mouthpiece of the 
Islamic Action Front -- which reported that "some members 
of the American Embassy staff" are gathering information 
on demonstrations, protests, and other political activity 
that is being used by the USG. The unstated but clear 
implication (in the view of some FSNs) is that those FSNs 
are acting as "spies" for the Americans against their 
Arab brethren.  Obviously, the type of information we are 
talking about is the bread and butter of Embassy 
reporting.  However, it is being painted in the most 
negative of terms, terms which make our FSNs feel very 
uncomfortable. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The degree to which FSNs are feeling societal 
pressures due to their employment with the Embassy varies. 
FSNs working in the Political section -- who are often 
called on to explain U.S. policy and act as 
intermediaries -- are feeling particularly vulnerable and 
have expressed their growing reservations about working 
for the USG at this time. On the other hand, Consular FSNs, 
although upset by U.S. policies and actions in the region, 
are able to focus their energies on processing visas, which 
they see as providing services to Jordanians.  However, 
one Consular FSN told the acting Consul that she is unable 
to sleep because she is constantly watching the news and 
worrying about the war.  FSNs in USAID report similar 
pressures and anxieties.  The pictures of civilian 
casualties of the war on Arab television are particularly 
disturbing to FSN employees. 
 
¶4.  (C)  During recent bi-weekly meetings with the 
Management Counselor, Post FSN Committee members discussed 
FSN employee concerns about safety and security. Of 
particular concern to them was the fact that the post's 
FSN life insurance program would provide no benefits to 
their families in the event that they were killed as a 
result of war or a terrorist attack.  (Post has addressed 
this by purchasing war-risk supplemental insurance for 
FSNs.) They pointed also to the fact that Americans at 
post are receiving danger pay while FSNs are uncompensated 
for the risks they take in working for the Embassy. They 
worry about being watched and possibly targeted as they 
enter and leave the Embassy compound, as well as about 
possible attacks away from the office. Post management 
views these concerns as valid and is exploring the 
possibility of obtaining a "Unique Conditions of Work" 
allowance to provide the FSNs with some financial 
compensation for those risks. 
 
¶5.  (C) Meanwhile, we are beginning to experience the 
effects of anti-American sentiments on a professional level 
outside of the Embassy. During a recent visit to the Arab 
Medical Center, the principal hospital used by the Embassy, 
the RMO was pulled aside by concerned Jordanian medical 
colleagues and advised that he should stay away from the 
hospital for his own safety. On the other hand, another 
Embassy officer recently went on a condolence call 
with some trepidation, only to find himself received 
with typically warm Jordanian hospitality. 
¶6.  (C)  Some vendors and landlords are beginning to 
balk at doing business with the Embassy.  We no longer 
tell potential landlords that we are from the US Embassy 
when looking at properties and we are sometimes rejected 
by landlords when they see the lease and realize they are 
dealing with the USG. In one case, an ironwork vendor who 
has done grill work for the Embassy for years is refusing 
to work with us now. 
 
¶7.  (C) Comment: While the recent political climate change 
for Americans in Jordan is largely due to the war with 
Iraq, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains at the fore- 
front of Jordanian concerns. To date we have experienced 
no degradation in either the quality of FSN performance 
or their willingness to continue working for the USG. 
However, the familial and societal pressures on our FSN 
staff to disassociate themselves from the Embassy will 
increase as the conflict in Iraq -- and the Intifada -- 
go on.  End comment. 
 
 
 
GNEHM