This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003830 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, AUGUST 18-20: UN 
HEADQUARTERS BOMBING; SENATOR MCCAIN DELEGATION; IRAQI 
GOVERNING COUNCIL 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: All newspapers report strong denunciations by 
the Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Minister 
of Information of the bombing of the UN headquarters in 
Baghdad. Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad condemned the 
"terrorist attack" which "targeted the lives of innocent 
employees and obstructed UN humanitarian efforts aimed at 
assisting our Iraqi brothers." Condolences and condemnations 
from a congressional delegation led by Senator John McCain 
visiting Kuwait received front page coverage. 
 
On August 20, a delegation from the Iraqi Governing Council 
was to arrive in Kuwait as part of a Gulf tour, one daily 
reports. Commentators reiterate Kuwaiti support for the 
council, and criticize the Arab League and Arab countries 
withholding recognition due to "its lack of elected 
legitimacy." One commentator writes that "these countries 
talk about the election issue as if their people had 
directly elected their leaders." END SUMMARY 
 
¶2.   News Stories: All newspapers front page Kuwaiti 
government denunciations of the attack on the UN 
headquarters in Baghdad. Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al- 
Ahmad sent a condolence cable to UN Secretary General Kofi 
Annan condemning the attack which "targeted the lives of 
innocent employees and obstructed UN humanitarian efforts 
aimed at assisting our Iraqi brothers." Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Sheikh Mohammad Al-Sabah described the bombing as a 
"cowardly attack," and reaffirmed Kuwait's "full support for 
the vital role played by the UN to maintain international 
peace and security." 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that Minister of Information, Mohammed 
Abul Hasan stated that "Saddam's cronies and the ousted 
regime are undoubtedly behind this explosion due to the UN's 
efforts to legitimize the current situation in Iraq."  He 
added that the Iraqi people were the most hurt by 
yesterday's explosion. 
 
Al-Watan, Al-Rai Al-Aam and Al-Anba report on comments by 
Senator John McCain and other members of his delegation upon 
their arrival in Kuwait on August 19 after visiting Iraq 
earlier that day.  Headlines follow: 
 
Al-Watan, front page:  "Senator McCain from Kuwait: 
Terrorists in Iraq are entering from Syria and Iran." 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam, front page:  "An American official suspects 
Ansar Al-Islam; Congressional delegation reaffirms `the 
crime will not pass without punishment.'" 
 
Al-Anba:  "Members of Congress offered their condolences to 
the families of the victims:  Terrorism will not prevent us 
from continuing to rebuild." 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that a delegation from the Iraqi 
Interim Governing Council, headed by its president, Ibrahim 
Al-Jafari, arrive in Kuwait today as part of a Gulf tour. 
Minister of Information, Mohammed Abul Hasan, said "Al- 
Jafari is not here to sell a product. Receiving him in 
Kuwait is an acknowledgement of his legitimacy and proof of 
future cooperation with Iraq." 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "The Arab World" 
Liberal Salah Al-Sayer wrote in independent Al-Anba (8/18): 
"In spite of the UN resolution to recognize the Interim 
Governing Council, some Arab countries are still insisting 
on not dealing with it, saying that the Iraqi people did not 
directly elect the council. These countries talk about the 
election issue as if their people had directly elected their 
leaders. The position of some Arab countries towards the 
Interim Governing Council serves the interests of their 
political regimes. It goes without saying that the success 
of the American project [in Iraq] will give birth to a new 
era and spread democracy, transparency, and respect for 
human rights, and will constitute an overwhelming threat to 
political regimes of these Arab countries." 
 
¶4.  "Welcome to the Interim Governing Council Delegation" 
Fahed Al-Ali wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/20):  "Both 
Iraqis and Kuwaitis paid dearly for the destruction of their 
countries [by Saddam Hussein], but Iraq today is striving to 
turn a new page in order to take its role in the 
international community. Kuwait is concerned about the 
political stability in Iraq, looks forward to Iraq's 
cooperation in finally resolving the POW issue. Kuwait 
welcomes the delegation and we hope that future relations 
will be based on wide cooperation between the two 
countries." 
 
¶5.  "The Interim Governing Council Deserves Recognition and 
Support" 
Ayed Al-Manna wrote in independent Al-Watan (8/20):  "Iraq's 
Interim Governing Council is the true representative of all 
Iraq's sects, despite the fact that it is appointed, not 
elected. This is not a negative point if the Council is 
striving to build a solid base for a new regime. Arabs 
should recognize this Council as legitimate and far better 
than Saddam's regime in order to accelerate the departure of 
the foreign forces from Iraq." 
 
¶6.  "An Institution That Has Lost Its Credibility" 
Ali Al-Baghli Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/19): 
"The Secretary General of the Arab League Amer Musa is 
campaigning against the legitimacy of the Interim Governing 
Council in Iraq under the pretext that it does not represent 
all Iraqis. Once again, the Arab League has thrown its 
weight against the will of the Iraqi people by not 
recognizing Iraq's Interim Governing Council. This is a 
clear indication that the Arab League had lost its 
credibility." 
 
 
URBANCIC