This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002788 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON SECSTATE VISIT AND 
PRESIDENT'S SPEECH 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- The lead story in all papers today, May 11, is 
Secretary Powell's visit to Israel and the West Bank. 
 
SIPDIS 
Reports highlight the fact that the Secretary met with 
Abu Mazen, the new Palestinian Prime Minister, and 
"ignored" Arafat.  All reports also highlight Israel's 
rejection of "any withdrawal that would threaten 
security". 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "Familiar objectives" 
 
Centrist, influential among the elite English daily 
Jordan Times (05/11) editorializes:  "U.S. President 
George Bush's initiative for the establishment of a 
free trade area between the United States and the 
Middle East might not be original, but it is timely 
and promising..  Unless solid foundations for peace 
are laid, free market reforms have few chances.  Peace 
remains a prerequisite for development, prosperity and 
stability." 
 
-- "America proposes trade openness o Middle East 
countries" 
 
Daily columnist Fahd Fanek writes on the back page of 
semi-official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai 
(05/11), commenting on President Bush's May 9 address 
at the South Carolina University:  "The U.S. President 
realizes that America's image, as a state biased in 
favor of Israel and against the rights of the 
Palestinian people and as a state occupying a very 
important Arab country, has reached rock-bottom.  Arab 
people must, therefore, be appeased and America's 
image must be improved in the Arab public opinion. 
Politically, Bush stressed the need for Israel to deal 
with the Palestinians with dignity and respect, to 
stop the settlements and to accept the concept of two 
states in accordance with roadmap.  This is firm 
language that the Arab side would welcome if it is 
followed by action.  Economically, Bush presented a 
grand project for establishing a free trade area 
between the Middle East and America.  This is the 
first step towards reshaping the map of the Middle 
East..  If the American President wants to bribe the 
Arabs, then finding a just solution to the Palestinian 
cause is the way to do that." 
 
-- "Who believes that Powell would succeed" 
 
Chief Editor Taher Udwan writes on the back page of 
independent, mass-appeal Arabic daily Al-Arab Al-Yawm 
(05/11):  "Very few Arabs would wager on the success 
of Secretary of State Powell's visit to Tel Aviv.. 
The bitter reality in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict 
remains as is.  The reason for that is not the 
brutishness of the rulers of Israel and their 
legendary steadfastness in the face of pressures, but 
because these pressures never really paralleled the 
task, namely ending a 36-year-old occupation, and 
never compared with the daily crimes that were 
committed by this occupation against the Palestinian 
people.  In short, the Americans did nothing for the 
Palestinian cause when they were miles away.  So why 
would they do anything now when they are occupying and 
controlling the largest and strongest Arab country. 
We are going to hear how Sharon fought off Powell's 
pressures, and how Bush plans to receive Sharon to 
exercise more pressure on him.  Many Arabs will 
believe that.  Yet, the fact remains: the occupation 
is stands with its daily killings and degradation of 
the Palestinians and the Arab nation.  Talk of 
expected American pressures on Israel to accept the 
roadmap without amendments is a joke." 
 
-- "Dr. George Bush" 
 
Daily columnist Basem Sakijha writes on the op-ed page 
of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour 
(05/11):  "The speech of President Bush at the South 
Carolina University may well be the clearest in 
declaring the American commitment to the political 
plan vis--vis the Middle East.  He speaks of two 
states, a Palestinian state and an Israeli state.  He 
focuses on democracy in the region.  He paves the way 
for Secretary Powell's regional trip.  This 
straightforward declaration coincides with talk about 
economic partnership..  Language used in Bush's speech 
seems to be more firm when it comes to what is 
required from Israel.  This is new.  Yet, the region 
will continue to doubtful of American declarations and 
announcements until it sees implementation on the 
ground.  Everyone is convinced that without American 
pressure on Tel Aviv, the current situation would 
continue to prevail." 
GNEHM