This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000801 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ZI
SUBJECT: BISHOPS SPEARHEAD DISCREET GOZ - MDC MEDIATION 
INITIATIVE 
 
REF: A. HARARE 540 
     ¶B. HARARE 222 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) Three bishops in Manicaland, and one Archbishop in 
Bulawayo, are spearheading an effort to arrange talks between 
the GOZ and the MDC focused on resolving Zimbabwe's political 
crisis.  They envision a depolarized, demilitarized Zimbabwe 
where the rule of law is upheld, but they are only seeking to 
establish common ground and points of contention between the 
GOZ and MDC as a starting point for talks.  They have 
consulted with GOZ officials, MDC leadership, and South 
African government officials.  Although this effort alone 
might be insufficient to forge a political settlement, a 
combination of this initiative with other elements of 
international and domestic pressure, might be enough to force 
Mugabe to the negotiating table.  End Summary. 
 
Bishops Draw up a Vision for Zimbabwe 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) In separate conversations with Poloff on April 16, the 
Bishop of the Anglican Church in Manicaland and President of 
the Zimbabwe Council of Churches (ZCC) Sebastian Bakare and 
Bishop Trevor Manhanga, President of the Evangelical 
Fellowship of Zimbabwe (EFZ), revealed that together with 
Bishop Patrick Mutume of the Roman Catholic Church in Mutare, 
and President of the Catholic Commission for Justice and 
Peace and Catholic Archbishop of Bulawayo Pius Ncube they 
have drawn up a ten-point vision for Zimbabwe and are quietly 
approaching the President's office to arrange negotiations 
between ZANU-PF and the MDC.  Though the Bishops did not 
provide a written copy of the vision statement, they reported 
that it calls for political depolarization, demilitarization, 
disbanding of the youth militia(s), non-partisan treatment 
within the courts, inclusiveness in the political process, 
and repeal of the draconian Public Order and Security Act 
(POSA) and Access to Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act (AIPPA). 
 
Parties to Set Agenda 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Bakare said they would not set the agenda for 
negotiations but rather seek to find common ground and points 
of contention as a starting point for the parties to move 
into substantive talks.  Bakare said their initiative comes 
out of deep resentment within churches that the GOZ has 
prevented them from distributing food and other social 
services that they once did and could again provide.  Bakare 
said their intent is to be an honest broker.  They draw 
church members from both political parties and have a moral 
responsibility to use their good offices to resolve the 
crisis. 
 
Increased Church Advocacy 
------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Bakare said that in comparison to various church and 
church associations' public statements, for example the March 
2003 Lenten Pastoral Letter by the Zimbabwe Catholic Bishops' 
Conference (ZCBC) - a scathing attack on the GOZ for 
politicizing food distribution and access to justice, and for 
promoting political violence - this initiative was an 
additional dimension of church activism (Refs A, B). 
 
Regional Connections 
-------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Bakare said that Anglican Archbishop of Capetown 
Njongonkulu Ndungane had offended local bishops during his 
February 2003 trip to Harare by not consulting with them 
beforehand.  Instead his meetings and his public remarks 
suggested he had been taken in by Mugabe's charm and 
rhetoric.  Ndungane's second visit in March was better, as he 
met with a broader spectrum of Zimbabwean society, including 
church and civic groups, but according to Bakare, the damage 
was already done.  Bakare acknowledged that - given the 
access Ndungane has been given to the President - it might be 
advantageous for the two initiatives to join, yet he still 
seemed personally offended by Ndungane's missteps.  Manhanga 
believed that it would be important for them to join with 
Ndungane and suggested he could convince Bakare.  Manhanga 
also said he had consulted with South African government 
officials, including Director-General in the Presidency 
Reverend Frank Chikane, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Aziz Pahad, Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee in 
Parliament Paulo Jordan and South African bishops.  They 
intended to lobby more broadly within SADC - and with the 
Kenyan Government - to press for inter-party dialogue within 
Zimbabwe. 
 
Likely Participants 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Bakare said their group consisted of roughly 10-12 
Zimbabwean bishops from every denomination and locality. 
While they had been requesting a meeting with the President 
for a month now to start the process, they had already met 
with some GOZ officials and received indications that ZANU-PF 
spokesman and elder statesman Nathan Shamuyarira and Minister 
of Special Affairs and ZANU-PF National Chairman John Nkomo 
might be tapped to represent the GOZ in negotiations.  On the 
MDC side, they have an open relationship with MDC President 
Morgan Tsvangirai and have also met Shadow Minister of 
Justice and MP David Coltart.  Both are open to this 
initiative. 
 
ZANU-PF Sincere? 
---------------- 
 
¶7. (C) Asked whether they thought the GOZ would take 
negotiations seriously and why, Bakare said that they would, 
that hardship was now affecting even the families of Mugabe's 
inner circle who no longer deny the existence of a crisis 
privately.  Manhanga said that travel bans and financial 
sanctions were also biting. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶8. (C) That the bishops have not yet succeeded in getting a 
meeting with President Mugabe does not bode well for the 
prospects for success of this initiative.  However, the 
bishops' initiative can be one key element in growing 
international pressure on the Mugabe regime.  Church 
pressure, tough nudging from Presidents Muluzi and Mbeki, 
travel bans and financial sanctions, and Zimbabwe's economic 
implosion might, in the end, be enough to force Mugabe to the 
negotiating table.  End Comment. 
SULLIVAN