This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, EB, AND DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON ELAB SOCI PHUM KIRF HO
SUBJECT: ARABS VIEWED AS ETHNIC COMMUNITY WITH MOST 
ECONOMIC CLOUT IN HONDURAS 
 
 
¶1.  A recent survey conducted in Tegucigalpa of 200 people 
over the age of 18 indicated that the majority of those 
polled view Arabs as having the most economic power in 
Honduras.  Those surveyed were asked two questions: which 
ethnic community do you view as the most powerful 
economically; and also, a somewhat generic two-pronged 
question about the overall social image of each ethnic group. 
The following ethnic groups were evaluated in the study: 
Chinese, African, indigenous, Arabic, and Jewish. 
 
¶2.  After the Arab community, those perceived as having the 
most economic clout (in descending order) were the Chinese, 
Jewish, African, and indigenous communities. As far as hard 
work is concerned, those surveyed overwhelmingly viewed the 
Chinese as the hardest workers (71 percent), followed by the 
Arabs (12 percent), indigenous (11 percent), African (3 
percent), and the Jewish community (2.5 percent).  When those 
surveyed were asked what is your overall view of these ethnic 
groups, the Chinese came out first, with 92 percent of the 
people seeing them in a positive light.  Following closely 
behind were the African and indigenous communities, with 89 
percent and 88 percent, with the Arabic and Jewish 
communities receiving only 49.5 percent and 35 percent 
respectively. 
 
¶3.  With respect to the Arab community, although perceived as 
the most economically influential group, they are not 
necessarily well-liked. (NOTE: The Arab community in Honduras 
is overwhelmingly Palestinian-Christian, not Islamic. END 
NOTE.) The Chinese, however, are seen as being both powerful 
and having a positive social image, particularly in terms of 
being hard workers.  The African and indigenous communities 
are viewed as having little economic power, but retain a good 
perception according to the survey. 
 
¶4.  COMMENT: Although there are no official statistics, it is 
estimated that between 150,000 and 200,000 of Honduras' six 
million inhabitants are of Arab descent, and of these, the 
great majority are Palestinian-Christian. By some estimates, 
no other country in the Western Hemisphere has a higher 
proportion of Arab immigrants and, in absolute numbers, 
Honduras ranks fourth after the United States, Canada, and 
Chile. Important figures of Arabic descent include: the 
former president Carlos Flores; the Canahuati family 
(textiles); and the Kafati family (coffee). Despite their 
economic clout, Arab-Hondurans are often the victims of 
prejudice or stereotyping. 
Palmer