This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001800 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2013 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT ASEC CASC CVIS IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: AMMAN SITREP 11 (3/25 1800 LOCAL) 
 
REF: FBIS GMP20030324000166 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Doug Silliman. Reason 1.5 (b,d). 
 
---------------- 
General Overview 
---------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Embassy continues on a normal schedule March 25, 
with Consular services open.  The Peace Corps office opened 
briefly to allow access to Jordanian staff, but activity at 
the American Language Center remains suspended. 
 
¶2. (C) The Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Jordan 
confirmed that the Bank had ordered commercial banks to 
freeze Iraqi government assets in Jordanian banks.  Other 
Iraqi deposits are being closely monitored by the CBJ.  The 
CBJ is in daily contact with banks on this issue. 
 
¶3. (C) The local owner of the Pizza Hut and Popeye's 
restaurant franchises informed the Embassy of an anonymous 
text message circulating on cell phones calling for a march 
to American restaurants today, March 25, in order to "break 
them."  The message specifically mentioned McDonald's, Burger 
King, Pizza Hut, Popeye's and Kentucky Fried Chicken.  The 
owner further stated that he contacted the police, who would 
provide extra security.  Embassy RSO confirmed that PSD was 
notified and requested to provide additional resources at the 
named franchises.  The local owner added that although 
business had been down 55% over the last week, he had heard 
no directs calls for a boycott but feared it would not be 
long in the coming. 
 
¶4. (C) Royal Jordanian is operating to all destinations 
except Baghdad.  On March 25, CEO Samer Majali expressed an 
interest in "helping the US" get Iraqi Airways flying 
quickly.  He said RJ is ready to operate flights on behalf of 
Iraqi airways out of Baghdad, even repainting planes if 
necessary.  He stressed RJ's long familiarity with Iraq. 
 
¶5. (C)  With the international airport and seaport and the 
border crossings to Israel remaining open, there has been no 
interruption of imports or exports.  Insurance companies have 
not designated Jordanian air or seaports as high risk/war 
risk areas, although some exporters say shipping rates have 
increased due to higher fuel costs.  QIZ companies report no 
problems.  They are continuing to meet deadlines and fill 
orders that were booked before hostilities began.  Target 
Corporation told us they recently booked new orders with 
Jordanian factories, and a QIZ company reported that investor 
interest continues. 
 
¶6. (U) A FBIS report cited a previously-unknown internet 
source as saying that two relatives of Saddam Hussein had 
defected to Amman, including Hisham Hasan al-Majid, brother 
of "Chemical Ali" al-Majid, and the son of the Iraqi 
president's sister Siham.  The source also states that it is 
believed that "Chemical Ali", Uday Hussein, and Izzat Ibrahim 
al-Duri were killed in the raid by US bombers on Thursday 
morning.  There are media reports of "hundreds" of Iraqis 
returning to Iraq via the Jordanian border in order to "fight 
for Iraq's honor." 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Amman Stock Exchange index, which had increased 
1.25% and 0.96% during the first two trading following the 
start of hostilities, declined by 0.75% on Monday and by 
0.25% Tuesday.  Traders attributed this more to Monday's 
global stock market drop than to increased domestic jitters. 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶8. (C) No new issues.  Inquiries remain below normal, but 
could be due to inclement weather in addition to the 
political situation. 
 
---------------------- 
GOJ Actions/Statements 
---------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) Nothing new to report. 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶10. (U)  A demonstration and march organized by opposition 
parties was scheduled for this afternoon in a commercial area 
of western Amman, evidently approved by PSD.  Demonstrations 
also continue at some universities but have been confined to 
the campuses and have not involved any violence.  Current 
snowstorms will likely limit the participation in these 
demonstrations. 
 
--------------------------- 
Refugee/Humanitarian Issues 
--------------------------- 
¶11. (C) The Jordan-Iraq border remains open and the flow of 
TCNs remains at a trickle.  There is still no sign of any 
Iraqi refugees/asylum seekers.  46 TCNs crossed into Jordan 
over the last 24 hours, bringing the total population of the 
transit camp to 169 -- Somalis, Sudanese, Malians, Eritreans 
and 1 Djibouti national.  IOM repatriated seven Egyptians 
this morning via the Aqaba ferry.  UNHCR Sr. Logistics 
Officer reports that the Jordan Red Crescent is doing a very 
poor job of managing the transit camp, noting that their food 
supplier provided food for the first time yesterday, March 
24, and that most likely the JRCS would be unable to handle 
more than the trickle of TCNs currently entering the camp. 
 
¶12.  (C)  On March 24, GOJ Minister of Interior Majali 
personally reviewed the cases of 23 people with document 
problems being held at the border.  UNHCR reported that the 
one Iraqi national who was trying to transit Jordan en route 
to Yemen was "persuaded" to return to Iraq.  UNHCR did not 
believe the return was involuntary.  22 Palestinians will be 
reviewed by UNRWA officials today.  If they are found to have 
UNRWA status, they will be admitted to the transit camp until 
a more permanent accommodation is identified for them.  UNHCR 
also reports that a handful of vehicles is entering Iraq from 
Jordan this morning, including a family of Iraqis laden down 
with household possessions who said they're returning home to 
Baghdad. 
 
----- 
Press 
----- 
 
¶13. (C) Despite repeated PA denials, Embassy Information 
Officer continues to receive inquiries from local journalists 
asking about rumors that the daughter of VP Cheney is en 
route to Baghdad to act as a "human shield." The Foreign 
Minister and the Israeli press officer called the Embassy to 
confirm that this story is untrue. 
GNEHM