This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 001325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET PINS PGOV NI
SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING OF NIGERIAN CHEVRON WORKER 
 
 
REF: LAGOS 1535 
 
 
1.(SBU) Embassy's Corporate Responsibility Officer (CRO) 
spoke July 31 with Ijaw national leader Chief Edwin K. Clark, 
who confirmed press reports that two Ijaw men (Egbema clan) 
involved in the kidnapping of the Nigerian Chevron employee 
(reported reftel), who we understand was released on the 
morning of August 1, have been arrested in Warri.  According 
to Clark, the two Egbema youth appeared at a July 30 meeting 
of the Delta State Security Council held by Delta State 
Government James Ibori in Warri.  (Note: This forum is 
normally restricted to government officials but the Governor 
has included ethnic leaders since the outbreak of 
inter-ethnic violence in Warri in March 2003.  end note) 
 
 
2.(SBU) When Clark recognized the two as leaders of the group 
claiming responsibility for the kidnapping, he identified 
them to Ibori. Ibori promptly ordered their arrest, claims 
Clark.  Ibori also reportedly issued an ultimatum to the 
other kidnappers: release the Chevron officials within 48 
hours or risk police action.  Clark stressed the Egbema youth 
involved in this extortion had neither his support nor that 
of Egbema elders.  "They're just criminals," he said. 
 
 
3.(SBU) CRO also spoke July 31 with Chevron's Abuja-based 
General Manager for Governmental and Public Affairs, Sola 
Omole, who explained  that PENGASSAN, the union of 
white-collar Nigerian oil workers, had written to Chevron 
urging the company to produce the release of its kidnapped 
member within 72 hours.  He said the PENGASSAN letter cited 
concerns for the employee's well-being, but the union never 
threatened to strike over this matter. In Omole's words: "if 
they've threatened to strike, we don't know about it." 
 
 
4.(SBU) Comment:  This was a criminal act, carried out by 
youth acting outside the guidance of recognized Ijaw leaders, 
even outside the Ijaw militant group "FNDIC."  This is not an 
outgrowth of the ongoing Warri crisis, which centers on 
fighting between the Itsekiri and the Ijaw Gbaramatu clan 
over political representation and control of the oil-rich 
Warri region.  Apparently, this also was not a case of the 
union flexing its muscle to demand that Chevron win the 
release of its member.  The story of a PENGASSAN threat was 
likely the brainchild of an irresponsible journalist.  Given 
PENGASSAN's lack of eagerness to join the recent national 
labor strike against the fuel increase, it never seemed 
likely that PENGASSAN would halt oil production now. Oil 
production was never threatened by this kidnapping. 
 
 
LIBERI