This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 003731 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, AUGUST 11-13: GUANTANAMO 
DETAINEES; "ONE HUNDRED DAYS" OP-ED; PALESTINIAN APOLOGY; 
POLITICAL REFORM 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: In an article entitled "Why the Distortion?" 
one commentator takes issue with President Bush's evaluation 
of the situation in Iraq one hundred days after the end of 
major military operations. 
 
Despite Prime Minister Abbas' reported statement of 
condemnation of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, several 
commentators continue to demand a formal apology before 
Abbas visits Kuwait. Remarks by PLO Political Chief Farouk 
Qaddomi published in the local media on August 12 that 
"hatred towards Palestinians still lives in the minds of 
Kuwaitis" fuels vicious personal attacks on the editorial 
pages, while another writer calls for forgiveness on both 
sides. 
 
A liberal commentator rebuts calls by Islamists earlier in 
the week for the release of the Guantanamo detainees by 
labeling the detainees "terrorists and outlaws." One 
newspaper reports that a Ministry of Interior delegation 
will depart soon for the U.S. and Guantanamo Bay. Local 
media also reports that a group of intellectuals signed an 
open letter calling for economic and political reform, and 
revisions to the constitution. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: Al-Rai Al-Aam reports on August 13 that 
the Chairman of the Popular Committee for the Kuwaiti 
Detainees in Guantanamo, Khalid Al-Adwa stated that a 
Ministry of Interior delegation will depart for the U.S. and 
Guantanamo Bay in the next few days. Al-Adwa told Al-Anba 
that the Pentagon might transfer some of the Gunatanamo 
detainees to Baghram Base in Afghanistan or to other 
American bases around the world to interrogate them. 
 
All papers report on August 12 Palestinian Prime Minister 
Mahmoud Abbas' statement from Abu Dhabi that "in the name of 
the Palestinian Authority, we condemn the Iraqi aggression 
against Kuwait and we condemn Saddam's regime for the crimes 
he committed in Iraq and Kuwait." 
 
On August 12, all papers report comments by the Chairman of 
the Political Department of the PLO, Farouk Qaddomi that 
"hatred towards Palestinians still lives in the minds of 
Kuwaitis" and that Kuwait should apologize to the 
Palestinians instead of demanding an apology for PLO support 
of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990. 
 
On August 11, all newspapers report on a petition signed by 
over forty intellectuals calling for revisions to the 
Kuwaiti constitution and a broad program of political and 
economic reform, including women's political rights. 
 
All papers report on August 13 that three "Iraqi 
infiltrators" were detained after climbing over the border 
fence and entering Kuwait. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶1.  "Why the Distortion?" 
Dr. Yasser Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(8/12):  "One hundred days after the end of the military 
operations in Iraq, President Bush attempted to give the 
impression that things in Iraq are going well and are 
achieving many successes. However, in reality, things are 
different. The American and the British soldiers are 
attacked on a daily basis, and the security situation in 
Iraq is still unstable. The cost of the war, which is even 
expected to increase, is another indication that the war on 
Iraq was not successful." 
 
¶2.  "The Prisoners of Guantanamo" 
Liberal Dr. Ahmad Al-Baghdadi wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (8/11): "America did not abduct [the detainees at 
Guantanamo] from their homes-- they traveled to Afghanistan 
hoping to become martyrs. They were deceived by the Islamic 
state in Afghanistan and the teachings of Bin Laden. All the 
prisoners at Guantanamo are terrorists and outlaws. They 
don't deserve to live in any civil society. They should 
receive a fair trial based on new [anti-terrorism] laws 
because traditional laws are not applicable to their cases 
as they are untraditional criminals." 
 
¶3.  "The Source of Hatred" 
Editor-in-chief of independent Al-Anba, Bibi Al-Marzook, 
wrote (8/11):  "Farouk Qaddomi's statement that hatred still 
lives in the minds of Kuwaitis and his demand for a Kuwaiti 
apology to the Palestinians is the same nonsense we have 
heard since August 2, 1990. The Palestinians still refuse to 
believe that Kuwait supports the rights of Palestinians and 
rejects Israel's occupation of Palestine. This 
disassociation from reality is what pushed the Palestinian 
leaders to blame all parties and accuse them of conspiracy 
against them. We refuse to apologize to people who do not 
deserve apology, and we refuse to defile our land with their 
presence among us." 
 
¶4.  "The Pimp of the Red Nights" 
Saleh Al-Shayji wrote in independent Al-Anba (8/11): 
"Qaddomi demanded an apology from Kuwait while he and his 
cronies are drinking alcohol at the gambling tables of the 
casino in Jericho. People like Arafat and Qaddomi are the 
enemies of the Palestinian people. They are more hostile 
than Sharon, Netanyahu and Barak. They are obstructing Abu 
Mazen's path to resolve the Palestinian problems. Abu 
Mazen's journey must continue and succeed and this can only 
be achieved by toppling Arafat and Qaddomi." 
 
¶5.  "Insistence For an Apology" 
Dr. Ayed Al-Manna wrote in independent Al-Watan (8/11): 
"Why does [Yasser Arafat] not apologize to a fellow Arab 
country which offered and is still offering all types of 
support to the Palestinian people? Is he afraid that Saddam 
will take revenge from him?" 
 
¶6.  "A New Stage and a New Era" 
Dr. Sadeq Al-Bassam wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (8/12): 
"If we are beginning a new era then why do we need the 
Palestinians to apologize to us now? I am astonished by the 
reactions from both sides, as if we are disputing this issue 
in the Arab League. President Bush and British Prime 
Minister Blair warmly received the new Palestinian leader 
Abu Mazen, while we are still disputing his visit. The 
Kuwaiti people are known for their forgiveness and love for 
other people, and therefore, we should leave our hatred 
behind us and deal sensibly with the new stage." 
 
¶7.  "Rigidity of the Constitution is not a Drawback" 
Former Secretary General of the Kuwait Democractic Forum, 
Ahmad Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (8/12): 
"Kuwaiti intellectuals who signed a statement to reform the 
political situation in Kuwait described Kuwait's 
constitution as the cause of Kuwait's crisis due to its 
rigidity. [but] the constitution is not the obstacle to 
achieving [democratic reforms]. The only obstacle to achieve 
these demands is the voting law, which should grant women 
their political rights, reduce the minimum age of 
eligibility to vote to 18 and allow the formation of 
political parties." 
 
 
URBANCIC