This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV, DRL 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL VM HUMANR
SUBJECT: DR. QUE UNDER DETENTION 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Poloff visited the home of democracy activist Dr. 
Nguyen Dan Que on March 18 to confirm reports of his arrest 
received earlier that day.  Based on the information originally 
provided by his brother in the U.S., and now confirmed by his 
wife, it appears that a large number of security officers hustled 
Dr. Que off to the local District 5 police station at 8:00 p.m. on 
March 17.  He was arrested in front of his home, without being 
given an opportunity to go inside and retrieve additional clothing 
or medications.  The arresting officers on the scene accused him 
of being on his way to an Internet cafe to publish criticisms of 
the GVN.  Police returned to Que's home in force just before 
midnight the same day to search through his possessions.  They 
removed his computer and cell phone, as well as assorted documents 
and written materials.  Several officers took still photographs 
and video footage during the search. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The long, unlit alley leading to Dr. Que's home 
appeared largely deserted when Poloff arrived at 7:30 p.m. on 
March 18.  Dr. Que's wife opened the door only long enough to 
quickly usher Poloff inside.  She appeared quite nervous and 
agitated throughout the conversation.  At one point, she sent a 
relative out to photocopy the investigation report signed by the 
police and family members upon completion of the search.  Post now 
has a copy of that report.  Dr. Que's stepson had been brought to 
the police station at 1:30 a.m. that morning to sign the report 
and to obtain a legal record of what had been taken from his home. 
Dr. Que's brother surmised that Dr. Que must have 
characteristically insisted on the police producing a legal 
document to entitle them to search.  Fortunately, the stepson was 
able to see Dr. Que at the time he signed the document.  Police 
later informed Dr. Que's wife that her husband had been moved to 
the municipal jail in District 1, and allowed her to send clothing 
and medicine.  Dr. Que's wife did not know why the authorities had 
decided to detain her husband at this time.  She speculated that 
it must have had something to do with one of his interviews with 
the foreign news media, including Radio Free Asia.  His brother 
thought it might have something to do with Dr. Que's recent 
criticism of GVN claims of a free press in Vietnam. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  During the conversation, Dr. Que's wife made clear that 
she and her husband would appreciate any representations by the 
Consulate General, in the hopes of gaining his release or 
improving his treatment.  She expressed concern that he had not 
been feeling very well before this latest incident.  (Post note: 
Dr. Que is an endocrinologist and has been self-medicating an 
ulcer and kidney ailments for a long time.  His brother sends him 
medication from the U.S. from time to time.  End note.)  Post will 
follow up with the relevant local authorities. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Comment:  Dr. Que and his family have occasionally 
raised exaggerated alarm bells in the past, but this incident 
would seem to be the real thing.  Just why the GVN would choose to 
raise the stakes with a well-known figure like Dr. Que at this 
time is not clear, given that he has been consistently outspoken 
in his views over a period of time.  It may be as simple (naive?) 
as his brother's assumption that hardliners in the GVN hope the 
USG would be otherwise distracted by events in Iraq. 
YAMAUCHI