This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 002480 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2013 
TAGS: KRIM SNAR CA
SUBJECT: ORGANIZED CRIME CONTINUES TO THRIVE IN CANADA 
 
Classified By: Pol MC Brian Flora for reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: In its latest report on organized crime 
activity, Criminal Intelligence Service Canada indicates that 
organized criminal groups in Canada are increasingly 
utilizing emerging technology to commit crimes such as fraud 
and money laundering, and that they are extensively involved 
in the large-scale cultivation and trafficking of 
residentially-grown marijuana. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Criminal Intelligence Service Canada collects 
intelligence and raw data from the criminal intelligence 
units of law enforcement agencies across Canada. The staff of 
the Central Bureau of CISC is located in Ottawa, and is made 
up of employees of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and 
personnel detailed from other police departments and 
government agencies.  CISC prepares and publishes an annual 
report on organized crime in Canada; the most recent report, 
covering activity through May 16, 2003, was released August 
¶25. The report presents an overview of the current activities 
of five broad organized crime groups in Canada: Aboriginal 
based, Asian based, Eastern European-based, outlaw motorcycle 
gangs, and Traditional (Italian-based). Organized crime at 
Canada's marine ports, in which all of the major crime groups 
are involved, is discussed. The report also evaluates trends 
in certain criminal activities in Canada:  contraband tobacco 
and alcohol, organized crime and the diamond industry, the 
illicit movement of firearms, technology and crime, the 
sexual exploitation of children, and street gangs. 
 
¶3. (C) The report describes some victories by law 
enforcement, including operations targeting outlaw motorcycle 
gangs and narcotics seizures at the Port of Halifax. But the 
report makes it clear that organized criminal activity 
continues throughout Canada, and that organized criminal 
groups are constantly seizing on new targets of opportunity 
and branching into new criminal ventures. While the Canadian 
press has reported that organized crime is on the rise in 
Canada, Shawn Scromeda, counsel in Justice Canada's Criminal 
Law Policy Section who works on organized crime issues, 
described that view as "alarmist." Scromeda told poloff that 
Canada lacks baseline indicators with which to measure 
whether organized crime is increasing or decreasing, and said 
the CISC report is intended to serve as a "snapshot" of 
current organized crime activity. Scromeda noted that the 
Canadian Parliament approved several significant amendments 
to the criminal code in December 2001 which target organized 
crime, and he believes the impact of these amendments is just 
beginning to be felt. 
 
¶4. (U) The complete text of the 2003 Annual Report on 
Organized Crime in Canada can be found at the following 
internet address:  www.cisc.gc.ca. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
KELLY