This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002056 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/28/2008 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU
SUBJECT: LEYLA ZANA RETRIAL OPENS; COURT DENIES RELEASE 
REQUEST 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1578 
     ¶B. ANKARA 1362 
     ¶C. 02 ANKARA 8881 
     ¶D. 02 ANKARA 6116 
 
 
Classified by Acting Political Counselor Nicholas S. Kass. 
Reasons: 1.5(b)(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The historic retrial of Leyla Zana and three 
other Kurdish former M.P.s began March 28 under tight 
security.  The court ruled against releasing the defendants 
pending the outcome of the trial and rejected a defense 
petition seeking a new chief judge.  Turkish and 
international human rights advocates and foreign diplomats 
attended the packed hearing.  The next session will be held 
April 25.  End Summary. 
 
 
-------------- 
Packed Hearing 
-------------- 
 
 
¶2. (U) The retrial of Leyla Zana, Hatip Dicle, Orhan Dogan, 
and Selim Sadak -- former Members of Parliament from the 
pro-Kurdish Democracy Party (DEP -- since banned) -- began 
under tight security March 28 in an Ankara State Security 
Court.  The retrial is the first granted under a recent 
EU-related reform measure allowing for retrial in a Turkish 
court pursuant to rulings of the European Court of Human 
Rights (ECHR -reftel B).  The former M.P.s were convicted, in 
a controversial 1994 trial, of membership in an illegal 
organization (the PKK). 
 
 
¶3. (U) The courtroom was filled to capacity; in addition to 
two Emboffs, the audience included: numerous relatives of the 
defendants; Turkish and international Kurdish/human rights 
advocates; diplomats from Germany, Denmark, and the EU; and 
the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Parliamentary Human 
Rights Committee.  Lead defense attorney Yusuf Alatas told 
Poloff more than 300 attorneys had asked to participate in 
the case, but he accepted only 25 in order to reduce tensions 
in the courtroom and allow more space for observers.  (Note: 
High-profile cases in Turkey often include 100 or more 
lawyers, though all but a few are glorified spectators.  End 
Note.)  There was a heavy police and military presence inside 
and outside the courtroom, but no visible tensions. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
Ruling: Defendants Stay Behind Bars 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (U) The three-judge court ruled unanimously against a 
motion asking that the defendants be released pending the 
outcome of the trial.  The court also unanimously rejected 
defense petitions asking for the replacement of the court's 
Chief Judge on the grounds that he had voted against granting 
the retrial and was therefore not impartial.  All four 
defendants gave lengthy opening statements.  Dicle argued 
that the remarks for which he was convicted had subsequently 
been mirrored in comments by State officials -- and thus 
decriminalized --  during his incarceration.  "We have 
already been in jail longer than any political prisoners in 
Turkish history," Dicle charged. 
 
 
¶5. (U) The court set April 25 as the date of the next 
hearing.  It also ordered that travel funds be made available 
to enable out-of-town witnesses to attend, and that civil 
servant witnesses be excused from work in order to testify. 
 
 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) This trial will be closely watched -- particularly by 
EU observers looking to test the sincerity of GOT human 
rights reforms.  The court's refusal to release the 
defendants or appoint a new chief judge does not bode well 
for an acquittal.  At the same time, the GOT is reeling from 
the recent ECHR ruling that jailed PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan 
did not receive a fair trial (Reftel A), and is under 
pressure to be on its best behavior in this case.  At a time 
when Turkey appears to be alienating its foreign friends left 
and right, the GOT can ill afford a perception of juridical 
legerdemain. 
PEARSON