This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CCOMMERCE FOR 4520/ITA/MAC/ONE/COBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV CASC ASEC JO
SUBJECT: JORDAN-AMERICAN BUSINESS COMMUNITY FORMS OSAC 
COUNTRY COUNCIL 
 
 ¶1.  (U) At a February 18 meeting convened by the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce in Jordan (the  Jordanian American 
Business Association--JABA), approximately 30 representatives 
of the Jordanian-American business community took the first 
step towards the establishment of an Overseas Security 
Advisory Council (OSAC) Country Council.  The meeting was the 
culmination of a series of informal meetings among Emboffs, 
business reps, and JABA officials,  requested by 
businesspeople with U.S. links looking for a mechanism to 
exchange-security related information and concerns.  The 
meeting was open to JABA members and non-members alike. 
 
¶2.  (U) Addressing this initial organizational meeting, Azzam 
Shweihat, JABA Vice Chair, stressed that the meeting was the 
result of ongoing discussions rather than in response to any 
specific threat or anticipated event.  Emboffs from RSO, FCS, 
and Econ described the role, functions, and constitution of 
OSAC and a Country Council, and suggested possible forms a 
local Council could take.  In the discussion that followed, 
attendees expressed security concerns regarding their 
visibility and vulnerability as U.S. or U.S.-affiliated 
institutions in times of conflict and instability.  Possible 
solutions ranged from increased security to a temporary 
removal of signage that suggested an American link. 
 
¶3.  (U) The group was nearly unanimous in its conclusion that 
formalizing an information-sharing process via an OSAC 
Country Council would go a long way towards addressing and 
allaying their concerns.  As a result, and in accordance with 
Department guidance, six reps formed an Interim Executive 
Working Group (IEWG) to meet February 23 to discuss next 
steps in forming a Country Council, including working with 
post on logistics, drafting a proposed charter, and setting a 
time for a general meeting.  Emboffs agreed to attend and to 
provide any needed support and assistance. 
GNEHM