This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001752 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT 
NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
PLEASE ALSO PASS TOPEC 
 
E.O. 12958:   DECL: 10-08-13 
TAGS: PTER PREL PINS PHUM CE UNICEF LTTE
SUBJECT:  As plan to demobilize child soldiers gets 
under way, further reports of Tiger abductions 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1735, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission James F. 
Entwistle.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  A UNICEF-led program to demobilize 
child soldiers kicked off recently, and has sparked some 
debate.  In a related development, reports now indicate 
that the day after the first "transit center" opened, 
the Tigers allegedly abducted several children in the 
east.  The issue of child soldiers continues to be 
contentious, and could have far-reaching ramifications. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
Program kicks off 
----------------- 
¶2. (C) A UNICEF-led program to demobilize child soldiers 
was inaugurated recently, and has sparked some debate. 
The program, which calls for the setting up of three 
"transit centers" for former child soldiers, would be 
managed jointly by UNICEF and the Tamil Rehabilitation 
Organization (TRO), a pro-Liberation Tigers of Tamil 
Eelam (LTTE) NGO.  The first of the centers opened on 
October 3 in Kilinochchi in the north, with 49 former 
child soldiers being placed in the facility.  The 
program is the result of a UNICEF-led action plan 
approved by the GSL and the LTTE aimed at releasing 
children from the LTTE and returning them to their 
families.  Children entering the transit centers would 
be questioned as to the details of their involvement 
with the Tigers, and put through an assessment to gauge 
the impact of psychological damage.  They would be 
reunited with their families following a program of 
rehabilitation, and Save the Children social workers 
would monitor each case.  Speaking at the opening 
ceremony on October 3, UNICEF representative in Sri 
Lanka Ted Chaiban stated that although the program was a 
positive development, reports of recruitment continued. 
 
------------------------------ 
Criticism over TRO involvement 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) The program has sparked some debate, however, 
with some critics stating in the press that the program 
lacks accountability and needs to be more transparent. 
Professor Harendra De Silva, chairman of the National 
Child Protection Authority, a leading child rights 
institution, told poloff on October 7 that the presence 
of the TRO in the transit centers would be detrimental 
to the rehabilitation of the children.  De Silva further 
stated that since the TRO was so closely affiliated with 
the LTTE, the children would not be able to speak freely 
against the LTTE without fear of reprisal once they 
returned to their homes.  De Silva opined that the 
program was an attempt by the LTTE to curry favor with 
the international community. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The press has also been skeptical of the TRO's 
involvement in the program, with THE ISLAND -- a 
independent opposition daily --  stating in an editorial 
on October 6 "The transit homes for children need to be 
made totally independent of the LTTE.  From the 
involvement of the TRO, a notorious LTTE front in the 
running of transit homes, it is manifestly evident that 
the LTTE is in control of them and continues to wield 
influence on the inmates.  These homes must be brought 
under the direct control of an independent organization 
with an impeccable track record and located away from 
the LTTE's reach." 
 
¶5.  (C) Responding to criticism of the TRO's involvement 
in the project, UNICEF representative Ted Chaiban told 
poloff on October 8 that the TRO's involvement was 
necessary, noting that the alternative to working with 
the TRO meant that there would be no mechanism to 
demobilize the child soldiers.  Chaiban added that he 
felt the TRO were "genuine" in trying to resolve the 
issue of child recruitment, and opined that the TRO had 
had a "positive" influence on the LTTE in terms of 
changing the Tiger attitude towards the rehabilitation 
of child soldiers.  Chaiban further noted that criticism 
towards the program had been unduly harsh, and focused 
on the TRO's ties to the LTTE, rather than on the larger 
issue of the effective rehabilitation of children. 
 
------------------------------ 
Reports of abductions continue 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (C) Shortly after the transit center opened, 
however, reports indicate that several children were 
abducted on October 4 near Batticaloa in the east. 
According to press reports, a large demonstration was 
held on October 6 to demand the release of the children. 
Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission (SLMM) spokeswoman Agnes 
Bragadottir told poloff on October 7 that monitors had 
gone to the scene of the abductions and been told that 
several children had been kidnapped, although the exact 
number of children remained unclear.  Bragadottir noted 
that the SLMM was trying to arrange a meeting with the 
Tigers to secure the release of the children, but that 
the monitors had not been able to meet with the Tigers 
as of October 8. 
 
¶7.  (C) Following the reported abductions, UNICEF issued 
a strongly-worded press release on October 7 
reprimanding the LTTE for the incident, characterizing 
the continued recruitment of children as "completely 
unacceptable," and noting that the LTTE's actions 
undermined the group's work and commitment toward making 
their efforts to demobilize child soldiers a success. 
 
¶8.  (C) COMMENT:  The issue of child soldiers has long 
been a contentious one, with international pressure on 
the LTTE to end the practice.  The LTTE have publicly 
stated that they no longer conscript children, however, 
evidence continues to indicate that they do.  All in 
all, the issue of child soldiers will have to be dealt 
with one way or the other by the LTTE if they want to 
maintain credibility in peace negotiations and with the 
international community, particularly with donor 
countries.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶9.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD