This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 000974 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM JO
SUBJECT: HR ACTIVIST PREDICTS FUTURE PROTESTS WILL BE 
PEACEFUL; "TRANSFER" ISSUE BIGGEST POTENTIAL FLASHPOINT 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 745 
 
     ¶B. AMMAN 6521 (2002) 
 
Classified By: CHARGE D'AFFAIRS GREGORY L. BERRY.  REASONS: 1.5 (b) and 
 (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY.  On February 9, PolOff met with long-time 
human rights contact Fawzi Samhoury, who has close contact 
with the IAF and professional associations.  Samhoury expects 
upcoming demonstrations planned by opposition leaders 
protesting possible military action against Iraq to remain 
peaceful.  He commented that the Jan 31 "anti-war" 
demonstration in Shmeisani (reftel A) was less "Pro-Saddam" 
than it appeared.  Among Jordanians likely to participate in 
forthcoming demonstrations, Samhoury claims demonstrators are 
most upset with the lack of parliamentary elections and the 
slower-than-expected pace of democratic reforms.  Samhoury 
also noted a growing frustration towards Arab leaders for 
failing to deal with the issue of Saddam.  He believes 
transfer of Palestinians from the West Bank (expected by some 
in the wake of military action in Iraq) is the one 
"flash-point" that could possibly ignite the street.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Samhoury said Islamic Action Front/Muslim 
Brotherhood leaders told him they will try to "motivate" 
Jordanians to demonstrate as a possible war approaches. 
According to Samhoury, in the last demonstration organizers 
did not provide transportation for people living outside of 
Amman for fear their busses would be stopped by security 
services.  The result was attendance of less than 3,000.  In 
forthcoming demonstrations, such as one planned for February 
15, Samhoury said he expects the organizers to step up 
efforts to increase crowd sizes.  The organizers also will 
likely attempt to plan demonstrations outside of Amman in the 
near future as well.  Samhoury said protest organizers are 
cooperating well with the GOJ and are "committed" to keeping 
the demonstrations peaceful.  He believes this cooperation is 
sustainable for at least the near-term. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) NOTE: On February 9, the IAF called on Jordanians 
to participate in a one hour "black-out" on February 14 at 
20:00 in an effort to "stop the war."  The IAF's statement 
was typically vitriolic, describing US and British troops 
massing in the region as "wolves," but called on Jordanians 
to take non-violent actions, such as turning off the lights 
and televisions in their homes, lighting candles and praying 
for God to "keep the predators away." END NOTE. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Although the January 31 demonstration was billed as 
"anti-war," Samhoury said the participants were privately (if 
not vocally) most upset about the lack of a parliament and 
democratic reform.  In general, demonstrators expressed their 
strong support for the opposition.  Samhoury said many people 
were also upset with regional Arab leaders for failing to 
avert the current Iraq crisis (note: this view was also 
reported to us by public affairs contacts). 
 
¶5.  (C)  Samhoury is optimistic rallies will remain peaceful. 
 He believes Jordanians, although frustrated, will not take 
to the streets in the event of an attack on Iraq.  "Only if 
the Israelis try to transfer Palestinians from the West Bank 
into Jordan or kill large numbers of Palestinians could 
things go out of control.  Transfer is the worst thing in the 
minds of people here, it will be worse for them than seeing 
Iraqi civilians killed on TV."  Samhoury commented that the 
USG would do well to make a push, "whatever you are able," 
to spur Israeli-Palestinian peace efforts forward. 
 
¶6.  (C) NOTE AND COMMENT.  Samhoury is still proceeding with 
his court case to have the Jordan Society for Citizens' 
Rights reinstated (reftel B).  Notwithstanding the 
dissolution of the JSCR, Samhoury is still in contact with 
human rights activists and demonstration organizers.  His 
view tracks with what many here are telling us:  While some 
Jordanians may occasionally hoist a pro-Saddam placard in 
order to express frustration with the US, they are most 
concerned about the possibility of Israeli actions in the 
West Bank following military action in Iraq. 
BERRY