null
Diana T Fritz  03/20/2007 05:23:10 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Search Results

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
CONFIDENTIAL

SIPDIS
TELEGRAM                                       September 30, 2003


To:       No Action Addressee                                    

Action:   Unknown                                                

From:     AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI (ABU DHABI 4402 - PRIORITY)        

TAGS:     EFIN, OVIP, PREL, PGOV                                 

Captions: None                                                   

Subject:  SCENESETTER FOR THE FIRST ECONOMIC BUSINESSWOMEN'S     
          FORUM IN ABU DHABI                                     

Ref:      None                                                   
_________________________________________________________________
C O N F I D E N T I A L        ABU DHABI 04402

SIPDIS
CXABU:
    ACTION: ECON 
    INFO:   P/M AMB DCM POL 
Laser1:
    INFO:   FCS 

DISSEMINATION: ECON
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: AMB: MWAHBA
DRAFTED: ECON: CCRUMPLER
CLEARED: ECON: OJOHN; PAO: TPONCE

VZCZCADI148
PP RUEHC RUEHZM
DE RUEHAD #4402/01 2731052
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 301052Z SEP 03
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1883
INFO RUEHZM/GCC COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ABU DHABI 004402 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DAS CHENEY AND G/IWI PONTICELLI FROM AMBASSADOR 
WAHBA 
 
DEPT ALSO FOR NEA/FO, NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/30/08 
TAGS: EFIN KWMN OVIP PREL PGOV TC
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR THE FIRST ECONOMIC BUSINESSWOMEN'S 
FORUM IN ABU DHABI 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Classified by Ambassador Marcelle M. Wahba for 
reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶2.  (U) DAS Cheney and Senior Coordinator Ponticelli:  I 
would like to welcome you to the UAE to attend the First 
Economic Businesswomen's Forum in Abu Dhabi, October 7-10. 
The UAEG has invested a tremendous amount of time and 
capital into this event, which is sponsored by UAE First 
Lady Shaykha Fatima bint Mubarak.  A review of the 
conference agenda confirms that the event organizers -- the 
Arab League's Council for Arab Businesswomen, the UAE 
General Women's Union, and the Abu Dhabi Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry -- have pulled together an impressive 
list of businesswomen from all over the region (including 
Her Highness Shaykha Hessa Saad Al-Sabah from Kuwait, 
Princess Basma bint Talal from Jordan, and Princess Reem 
Bint Al Waleed bin Talal from KSA) to address the more than 
400 expected participants.  This scenesetter also serves as 
a primary on the status of women in the UAE.  Please see 
speech building blocks in paragraph 15. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Shaykha Fatima: An Advocate For UAE Women 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Shaykha Fatima, with the possible exception of UAE 
President Shaykh Zayid, is the strongest proponent in the 
UAE for women's rights and increasing opportunities for 
women in the workforce.  Fatima, who is in her late 
fifties, is a key player in UAE politics and a key advisor 
to her octogenarian husband on any number of domestic and 
regional issues.  She is the mother of important U.S. 
interlocutors Armed Forces Chief of Staff Muhammad, de 
facto Foreign Minister Hamdan, State Security Director 
Hazza, and Information Minister Abdullah, and has played a 
dynamic, behind-the-scenes role in formulating the UAE's 
pro-American policy post-9/11.  In past meetings, Fatima 
has articulated the UAE's policy with regard to the war on 
terrorism and expressed concern about regional stability, 
in particular tension within the Saudi ruling family. 
 
¶4.  (C) Fatima is a moderate voice for change in the UAE 
and follows Shaykh Zayid's efforts to combat the more 
conservative elements of UAE society.  Fatima is aware that 
secular education is the only way to ensure that Emirati 
students are not being indoctrinated by over-zealous 
(mostly Egyptian and Jordanian) teachers, and has been the 
guiding force in what is shaping up to be a complete 
reassessment of the primary and secondary education system 
in the UAE. 
 
¶5. (U) Fatima has also been a strong advocate for the 
rights of Emirati women in the workplace and educational 
realm, demanding that UAE universities practice a gender- 
blind policy of admission.  As a result, 70 percent of UAE 
university students are now women.  She also is pushing for 
inclusion of women in the UAE's all-male, all-appointed 
parliament.  In her capacity as Chairperson of the UAE 
General Women's Union, Fatima in early 2002 hosted the 
First Arab League Women's conference in the UAE.  The 
conference focused on women in the media and was the first 
in a series of Arab League conferences dealing with Arab 
women's issues.  The spouses of six Arab Heads of State, 
including Egyptian First Lady Suzanne Mubarak who gave the 
keynote address, attended this first conference.  Also in 
attendance were female journalists from throughout the Arab 
world, Europe and the United States.  We expect this year's 
Businesswomen's Forum to meet similar success. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Local Women's Groups Take The Lead 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Under the visionary leadership and encouragement of 
Shaykha Fatima, the General Women's Union (GWU) since 1975 
has acted as an umbrella organization for UAE's many 
women's societies and associations.  The quasi-governmental 
GWU is responsible for suggesting new laws as well as 
amendments to existing regulations on matters relevant to 
women, children, and the disabled in the UAE.  The GWU 
offers vocational training, and routinely conducts 
educational programs on a wide-range of subjects -- 
including dressmaking and handicrafts, home economics, 
computers and foreign languages.  The organization also 
offers job placement services, family mediation services, 
and religious education to women.  As evidenced by the 
broad participation of women expected at the October 
conference, the GWU has strong Arab and international links 
with women's organizations around the world. 
 
¶7.  (U) A co-sponsor of the conference, the UAE 
Businesswomen's Committee was established in 2001 by the 
Abu Dhabi Chambers of Commerce and Industry to support 
working women in the UAE and give them opportunities to 
network with other female professionals throughout the Arab 
World. The UAE Businesswomen's Committee was recognized by 
the Arab League in 2002 and has since sponsored a number of 
local networking events.  The UAE Businesswomen's Committee 
has focused on establishing training programs for women on 
creating a business plan, using computers, and managing 
business accounts.  In 2002, the Businesswomen's Committee 
counted 1,142 businesswomen on its membership roster, 
representing construction, tailoring, trade, contracting, 
and many other industries. 
 
------------------------------------ 
UAE Women Have Made Great Strides... 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (U) Since the founding of the federation more than 30 
years ago, UAE women have made tremendous progress in 
finding opportunities outside of the home and now are an 
integral part of the country's workforce.  In previous 
meetings with various U.S. officials, UAE businesswomen 
have stressed that they face very different challenges than 
their counterparts elsewhere in the Gulf -- especially 
women in Saudi Arabia.  Most UAE university graduates are 
female -- quality and availability of education is not a 
problem.  Furthermore, women are guaranteed equal rights 
and opportunities under the law, and UAE families nowadays 
are used to women working outside of the home. 
 
¶9.  (U) Recent data supports the assertion that more female 
students are enrolled in the UAE's higher education 
programs than male students.  During the 2002-2003 school 
year, the UAE University in Al Ain admitted a total of 
3,973 students, of which 2,742 were female.  Women 
comprised 3,768 of the total 6,501 new student admissions 
at the UAE's Higher Colleges of Technology.  Zayed 
University for Women registered 635 new students to its two 
campuses -- an increase of 12 percent over the previous 
year.  In 1972, there were only 54 adult education centers 
in the UAE and the majority of educators were men.  In 
2001, the number of adult education centers had doubled to 
118, and 59 percent of teachers and administrative staff 
were females. 
 
¶10.  (U) Women are now an important part of the UAE 
workforce, and make-up 41 percent of education 
professionals, 34 percent of health care professionals, and 
20 percent of social workers in the UAE.  UAE female 
employees can be found in 24 federal ministries, and 
account for 28 percent of all government workers.  UAE 
women working in the banking and financial services sector 
constitute 39 percent of all women working in that field. 
Seventy percent of women working in banks also are college 
graduates or possess advanced degrees. 
 
----------------------------------- 
...But Still Face Unique Challenges 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) UAE businesswomen have told us, however, that a 
major challenge facing UAE women is a lack of self- 
confidence and role models for young entrepreneurs.  For 
that reason, the UAE Businesswomen's Committee has focused 
its efforts on training programs designed to equip national 
women with the skills they need to start and manage their 
own businesses.  The programs target young ladies at the 
Higher Colleges of Technology and Zayed University, as well 
as businesswomen working out of their homes. 
 
¶12.  (U) UAE businesswomen also have problems obtaining 
access to capital.  Although the generally wealthy and 
well-connected women of Abu Dhabi have few problems 
financing new businesses, very real social/cultural 
restrictions and non-availability of start-up capital -- 
particularly for those without collateral, and especially 
in the poorer northern emirates -- remain significant 
challenges many Emirati women have yet to overcome. 
 
¶13.  (C) During a February visit to the UAE of NEA/RA 
Director Gary Grappo, members of the Executive Council of 
the National Businesswomen's Committee admitted that 
specific training under MEPI for businesswomen (writing a 
business plan, managing business accounts, etc.) would be 
helpful.  The Executive Board also requested a list of top 
businesswomen in America, from which the Committee could 
extend invitations to various conferences and explore the 
possibility of a U.S-UAE businesswomen mentoring program, 
also within the framework of MEPI. 
 
¶14.  (U) Our Mission has encouraged the MEPI office to 
develop long-term goals and specific programs building on 
the progress already underway in the UAE with the formation 
of businesswomen's associations and existing UAEG programs 
to support women's entry into the private sector.  MEPI 
funds also could be used to support practical skills 
training in setting up and running a business for aspiring 
businesswomen, and bringing more American women speakers to 
the region to address relevant issues. 
 
------------------------ 
Suggested Talking Points 
------------------------ 
 
¶15.  (U) You are scheduled to give a brief, 5-minute 
address during the opening session of the conference on 
October 7, and may want to include the following themes 
that both recognize the remarkable achievements made by UAE 
women and reaffirm the USG's commitment to help further 
open doors for local women: 
 
-- UAE women have made tremendous strides during the last 
30 years, and now are an integral part of the country's 
workforce. 
 
-- Many of the positive changes -- improved health care for 
women and children, increased private sector employment for 
aspiring businesswomen, and quality and availability of 
education for girls -- can be directly attributed to the 
vision and leadership of Her Highness Shaykha Fatima bint 
Mubarak and His Highness President Zayed bin Sultan Al- 
Nahyan. 
 
-- I also applaud the efforts of the General Women's Union 
and the UAE Businesswomen's Committee to help prepare women 
for work outside of the home, encourage women to start 
their own businesses, and help professional women maintain 
the delicate balance between work and family -- a struggle 
that all of us face. 
 
-- The Middle East Partnership Initiative also seeks to 
foster entrepreneurship and opportunities in the private 
sector for UAE nationals, especially women. 
 
-- We would like to be your partners in supporting existing 
and future programs to train national women for private 
sector employment, and businesswomen's associations and 
programs that provide practical skills training. 
 
-- We would also like to explore further the possibility of 
establishing an Arab Businesswomen or U.S.-UAE 
Businesswomen Network or mentoring program that would bring 
together female entrepreneurs from our two countries. 
 
Wahba