This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 RANGOON 000757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP AND INL 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
DEA FOR OF,OFF 
CDR USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM BM
SUBJECT: BURMA'S COUNTERNARCOTICS PERFORMANCE 
 
REF: A. STATE 100273 
     ¶B. STATE 153955 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The Burmese government (GOB) has reduced opium 
cultivation, cooperated with the United States, Australia, 
China, Thailand, and other states on a series of major 
narcotics cases, and continued to prosecute traffickers.  It 
has failed in regard to its new money laundering law, whose 
implementation has been delayed by the collapse of Burma's 
private banking system.  The GOB has deliberately chosen to 
give the Wa and other former insurgent groups time to exit 
the narcotics trade - the last of these grace periods expires 
in 2005.  The GOB has cracked down whenever former insurgent 
groups have broken their pledges and, after 2005, the United 
Wa State Army, like all other groups in Burma, will be fair 
game for government enforcement actions.  Burma's current 
narcotics legislation (basically the 1993 Law on Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances) is more than adequate for 
the investigation and prosecution of major drug offenses.  It 
has been used already to put more than 10,000 felons behind 
bars with sentences in excess of ten years each.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. The paragraphs below are keyed to the criteria outlined in 
our counternarcotics demarche (reftel A). 
 
¶3. Facilitate the participation of independent monitors to 
verify poppy eradication and other counternarcotics efforts. 
 
Burma cooperates with the United States on its annual opium 
yield survey and UNODC on census surveys of opium production. 
 In fact, all recent estimates of opium and heroin production 
in Burma have been compiled by the United States and the 
United Nations on the basis of these surveys.  According to 
the United States, Burma reduced opium production by more 
than three-quarters between 1996 and 2002.  According the 
United Nations, Burma reduced its opium production by more 
than half over the same period.  The results of the U.S. 
survey in 2003 is not yet available.  According to the United 
Nations, Burma reduced its opium fields by a further 24 
percent in 2003, despite good weather.  By their estimate, 
the acreage under opium cultivation in Burma in 2003 declined 
to only 62,200 hectares, down more than 100,000 hectares from 
the area under cultivation in 1996. 
 
Burma cooperates closely with the United States' Drug 
Enforcement Administration and the Australian Federal Police 
on narcotics enforcement activities.  Both DEA and AFP 
maintain active offices in Burma.  Both offices have 
maintained detailed records of the Burmese government's 
seizures, arrests, and other law enforcement operations in 
recent years.  DEA's file, compiled and verified by agents 
who have been involved in investigations in Burma, is 
available in Washington. 
 
¶4. Arrest and prosecute the senior leadership of heroin and 
methamphetamine trafficking organizations. 
 
Burma has arrested over 90,000 persons on drug-related 
charges over the past 15 years.  Through the end of 2002, 42 
persons were sentenced to death for drug-related offenses in 
Burma, and another 37 were imprisoned for life.  During the 
same period, more than 12,500 persons were sentenced to 
prison for ten years or more for narcotics-related offenses. 
These arrests and prosecutions continued in 2003.  While 
statistics on prosecutions are not yet available, preliminary 
data indicate that Burma arrested more than 700 suspects in 
drug-related cases during the first three months of 2003. 
 
Many of these arrests and convictions involved major drug 
syndicates.  Many also involved close cooperation with the 
United States, Australia, and other western law enforcement 
agencies.  Among the most notable were the following: 
 
-- Cooperation with the United States and China in the 
investigation of the "1-2-5" syndicate, which led to the 
arrest of 28 persons in the United States, Hong Kong, China, 
and India in May 2003.  Reportedly, this group had been 
responsible for the export of more than $100 million in 
heroin to the United States since 2000. 
 
-- Cooperation with China in a series of arrests and seizures 
that have continued throughout 2001 and 2002 all along the 
Chinese border following the signature of a Chinese/Burmese 
MOU on counternarcotics operations in January 2001.  Since 
then, Burma has turned over 60 fugitives to China, including 
members of one group (Tan Xiao Lin and company) which China 
described as the "largest armed drug-trafficking gang in the 
Golden Triangle." 
 
-- Cooperation with Thailand in the seizure of 116 kilograms 
of heroin and 7.8 million methamphetamine tablets in February 
¶2002.  Two of the principals behind this shipment were also 
eventually convicted in Rangoon and sentenced to "indefinite" 
(i.e., unending) terms in prison. 
 
-- Cooperation with the United States Drug Enforcement 
Administration and the Australian Federal Police in the 
seizure of 357 kilograms of heroin in Fiji in October 2000. 
Death sentences were eventually handed down in Rangoon for 
two drug kingpins connected with this case. 
 
¶5. Establish a mechanism for reliable measurement of 
methamphetamine production and demonstrate progress in 
reducing production and increasing seizures. 
 
There is no mechanism for reliably measuring illicit 
methamphetamine production in any country, including the US. 
The most commonly used procedure is to take seizures and 
multiply by 10.  If applied to Burma, that measure would 
suggest production of 320 million tablets in 2001, 94 million 
tablets in 2002, and 19 million tablets during the first 
three months of 2003.  However, the GOB believe that this 
reduction in seizures is due more to changing patterns of 
methamphetamine production and trafficking than it is to the 
overall reduction in production.  Since 2002, under pressure 
from the GOB, more traffickers have taken to mixing chemicals 
at sites along the Chinese/Burmese border and then shipping 
the product in powder or crystal form along the Mekong River 
to plants in Laos, Thailand, and Burma where the drug is 
flavored for local markets and stamped into tablets.  The net 
result is that the product spends far less time in Burma than 
before; hence, the lower seizures. 
 
¶6. Establish an effective program for the control of 
precursor chemicals. 
 
Burma does not have a precursor chemical industry; nor does 
it produce any of the precursor chemicals used in the 
manufacture of heroin, amphetamine-type stimulants, or other 
synthetic drugs.  All chemicals used for the production of 
narcotics in Burma (with the exception of opium itself) are 
imported from China, India, Thailand, and other states.  None 
are produced locally. 
 
Burma has outlawed 25 precursor chemicals, including 
ephedrine, acetic anhydride, and even caffeine (in bulk). 
However, it has not yet been able to stem trafficking from 
neighboring countries, despite seizures in 2002 which 
amounted to 2,900 liters of acetic anhydride, 26,000 liters 
of chemical liquids, 4,800 kilograms of chemical powders, and 
1,700 kilograms of ephedrine.  On the other hand, it has 
begun to build the international cooperation that is required 
to control this trade.  In January 2003, Burma held its first 
trilateral conference with India and China on precursor 
chemicals, and in March met bilaterally with India on the 
same topic.  As a result of those meetings, India is now 
considering creating a 100-mile wide exclusion zone along its 
border with Burma within which any possession of ephedrine 
would be illegal.  A similar zone on the Indian frontier 
already exists for acetic anhydride. 
 
¶7.  Create a special task force of police and prosecutors to 
target and investigate high-level drug traffickers and drug 
trafficking groups. 
 
Drug enforcement efforts in Burma are led by the Central 
Committee for Drug Abuse Control (CCDAC), which is comprised 
of personnel from the police, customs, military intelligence, 
and the army.  CCDAC now has 21 drug-enforcement task forces 
around the country, with most located in major cities and 
along key transit routes near Burma's borders with China, 
India, and Thailand.  CCDAC's units are underfunded and badly 
equipped.  Nevertheless, they are bringing narcotics 
traffickers to heel and securing convictions.  As noted 
above, more than 90,000 persons have been arrested for 
narcotics-related offenses in Burma over the past 15 years 
and more than 10,000 have sentenced to 10 years or more in 
prison.  CCDAC has also developed arrangements for 
cooperation with the United States, China, Thailand, and 
India, among others, that have allowed law enforcement agents 
around the world to move effectively against major drug 
cartels. 
 
Burma, in short, has an organization that has already proved 
that it can move effectively against high-level drug 
traffickers and drug trafficking groups.  What it does not 
have is a political situation that will allow it to move 
aggressively against former insurgent groups, like the United 
Wa State Army and others implicated in the drug trade, for 
fear of reigniting the insurgencies that devastated eastern 
Burma for so many decades before 1989.  Burma has 
deliberately chosen to slowly wean these former insurgent 
groups from their dependence on the narcotics trade, while 
building power at the center to use when the grace periods it 
has allowed these groups run out.  In 1997, the Eastern Shan 
State Army of Sai Lin promised to end opium production in its 
cease-fire area and did so.  In 2000, the Kokang Chinese of 
Pen Kya Shin broke their pledge to end opium production and, 
since 2001, have been raked by counter-narcotics operations 
that have been mounted by both the Burmese and Chinese 
governments.  In 2003, as a result, opium production in the 
Kokang Chinese capital district of Lawkai was a mere fraction 
(20 percent) of its level two years earlier.  In 2005, the 
United Wa State Army is scheduled to end opium production. 
If it fails, it will get the same treatment from the Chinese 
and Burmese that the Kokang Chinese have already tasted. 
 
¶8.  Fully implement and enforce Burma's money-laundering 
legislation. 
 
The GOB enacted new and relatively powerful money laundering 
legislation in June 2002.  That legislation criminalizes 
money laundering in connection with virtually every kind of 
serious criminal activity and levies heavy responsibilities 
on banks in regard to reporting.  Penalties are also 
substantial.  Implementation of the new legislation has 
lagged, however.  While the government held training seminars 
on money laundering, started several investigations, and 
seized assets in connection with several major narcotics 
cases, it has not yet prosecuted these cases as violations of 
the money-laundering law.  Neither has it published 
regulations to guide bank reporting in regard to suspicious 
transactions. 
 
The net result is that the government is effectively working 
only with the asset seizure provisions of its 1993 narcotics 
law.  Perhaps deterred by a banking system crisis which 
ripped through the country in February 2003, it has not 
really yet put its money laundering legislation to work. 
 
¶9.  Take effective measures to stem the flow of illicit drug 
money into the banking system and economic enterprises and to 
end joint economic ventures with the leaders of drug 
trafficking organizations. 
 
Money, illicit or otherwise, is not flowing into Burma's 
banking system, which collapsed in February 2003.  Since then 
deposits at Burma's banks have declined by estimated 40 
percent, with the hardest hit banks being those, like the 
Asia Wealth Bank, Myanmar Mayflower Bank, and Myanmar 
Oriental Bank, that were rumored to have connections with 
criminal elements.  The GOB has not attempted to bail the 
banks out of their current predicament; rather, it has let 
them slowly collapse as monuments to bad banking. 
 
A variety of factors contributed to this banking system 
crash, including a long-standing climate of financial 
repression, the collapse of Burma's informal financial 
institutions, and the introduction of Burma's new money 
laundering law, which required bank depositors to prove, if 
challenged, the legal origin of their funds.  Since accurate 
record-keeping is a rarely practiced art in Burma, many 
businessmen reacted to the new legislation, and the 
possibility that the government might seize their funds, by 
withdrawing their deposits.  This was probably not the 
primary cause of the crash, but was one of the straws that 
broke the back of Burma's banks. 
 
The GOB does not have joint ventures with the leaders of drug 
trafficking organizations.  Rather, it has given corporations 
like the United Wa State Party's Hong Pang Company outright 
concessions for the operation of a variety of businesses 
which range from farms to ranches to ruby mines and other 
trading and industrial establishments.  This has been 
controversial, both in Burma and abroad, but the GOB has 
argued that it is necessary, for two reason: (1) to give 
known narcotics trafficking groups an alternative source of 
income; (2) to tie these groups more closely to the Burmese 
economy.  The Burmese view is that these former insurgents 
are less likely to go back into rebellion if they have 
interests in the Burmese economy. 
 
¶10.  Amend Burma's substantive and procedural criminal laws 
to facilitate effective investigation and prosecution of 
major drug traffickers. 
 
With UNODC's assistance, Burma has recently completed the 
draft of a new mutual legal assistance law which will 
facilitate legal and judicial cooperation with other 
countries.  Reportedly, this draft legislation will be made 
law later this year.  The legal regime will also be helped by 
the final publication of the rules and regulations for the 
2002 money laundering law.  However, with the banking system 
now imploding, that is not a critical issue. 
 
Otherwise, Burma's current narcotics legislation (basically 
the 1993 Law on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances) 
is more than adequate for the investigation and prosecution 
of major drug offenses.  It is completely in compliance with 
the recommendations of the 1988 UN Drug Convention and has 
been used already to put more than 10,000 felons behind bars 
with sentences in excess of ten years each. 
Martinez