This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 001504 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV; INL/AAE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM PREL PINS LA VM CNARC
SUBJECT:  LARGEST DRUG BUST EVER IN VIETNAM 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY.  In what Vietnam's state-controlled media 
reported as the "largest single heroin seizure ever" in 
Vietnam, Quang Tri provincial counternarcotics police seized 
approximately 40 kilograms of heroin entering Vietnam in a 
truck near the Lao Bao border crossing.  Five people are 
under temporary detention and the case is under further 
investigation by Ministry of Public Security's 
Counternarcotics Department.  END SUMMARY 
 
----------------------------- 
QUANG TRI -- A DRUG "HOTSPOT" 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Quang Tri province is located in central Vietnam and 
shares a 206-kilometer border with Laos.  According to Le 
Thanh Hien, Deputy Director of the Anti-smuggling Department 
of Vietnam's General Department of Customs, Quang Tri is a 
drug hotspot due to its proximity to Laos and trafficking 
routes from the Golden Triangle.  Hien said  most drugs that 
come into Quang tri originate in Laos.  From Quang Tri, 
drugs typically make their way north to Hanoi or south to Ho 
Chi Minh City, either via Highway 1 or by train, he added. 
 
--------------- 
CASE BACKGROUND 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  According to the "Labor" newspaper, Quang Tri 
counternarcotics police detected the case on June 9 near the 
Lao Bao international border gate.  They discovered a truck 
entering from Laos had 40 kilogram of heroin hidden among 
other goods.  (Note:  During all of 2002, GVN law 
enforcement entities seized only about 55 kilograms of 
heroin.  end note)   Section Chief Le Van Truong of MPS' 
Counternarcotics Department, confirmed that this was the 
biggest single seizure ever recorded in Vietnam. 
 
-------------------- 
COULD THERE BE MORE? 
-------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  According to Customs' Hien, MPS, the Border Army, 
and Customs have now been tasked to investigate other 
possible links to this seizure.  Hien added that authorities 
hope that the suspects arrested will lead them to other drug 
activity in the area.  He predicted that a trial would take 
place in about six months, culminating in "several" death 
sentences.  (Note:  Under Vietnam's drug law, anyone found 
in possession of 100 grams or more of heroin may be 
sentenced to death.  End note) 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶5.  (U)  While relatively impressive, this seizure lends 
credence to what DEA Hanoi Country Office, the UN, and 
international law enforcement agencies have been saying for 
years - the seizure rate in Vietnam is abysmally low 
considering the estimated amounts of drugs transiting 
Vietnam's long, porous borders with its neighbors.  In 
addition, the relatively little press coverage -- during 
"drug awareness month" -- is both puzzling and 
disappointing.  Despite this successful seizure, there has 
not been any noticeable change in MPS' general lack of 
operational cooperation with DEA.  Even several attempts to 
obtain additional information regarding this specific 
seizure have proven fruitless.  As in the past, GVN 
counternarcotics authorities have told DEA that Vietnam's 
secrecy laws prohibit them from disseminating "sensitive 
information" to foreign agencies. 
 
¶6.  (U)  This message has been cleared by the DEA Hanoi 
Country Office. 
BURGHARDT