This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, AUGUST 25-27: ISRAELI- 
PALESTINIAN VIOLENCE; FREEZE OF HAMAS ASSETS; TERRORISM; 
IRAQ 
 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: Conservative commentators accuse the US of 
"unification with the Zionists" for a "lack of condemnation" 
of Israeli attacks on Hamas members and the freeze of Hamas 
assets earlier in the week. 
 
One commentator defends the US Ambassador to Kuwait, Richard 
¶H. Jones, from allegations of "interference in Kuwait's 
affairs." With the anniversary of the September 11 attacks 
approaching, another bemoans how extremists "have destroyed 
the image of Islam" and asks, "what will we say to the 
residents of New York?" 
 
All newspapers report popular anger and calls for government 
accountability over poster advertisements that appeared 
around Kuwait City this week for a new album by an Iraqi 
singer Kazem Al-Saher, accused locally of ties to Saddam's 
regime. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: All newspapers report popular unhappiness 
with the appearance of posters advertising a new album 
released by Iraqi singer Kazem Al-Saher, referred to in the 
local media as the "spoiled child of the Saddam regime," 
with many Kuwaitis calling the promotion campaign "an 
offense to the Kuwaiti POWs who were martyred in Iraq."  Al- 
Rai Al-Aam reports that the Public Prosecutor has refused a 
request by several Kuwaiti lawyers to file charges against 
the Minister of Information for allowing the posters to be 
hung. 
 
All newspapers report this week that DNA tests have 
positively identified the remains of four more Kuwaiti POWs 
found in a mass grave in Iraq. 
 
Al-Anba reports that four Kuwaiti lawyers will file a 
petition carrying the signature of 1000 Kuwaitis with Prime 
Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad asking the government to 
deliberate resuming relations with Iraq. 
 
Al-Seyassa reports on August 26 that the committee formed by 
the Council of Ministers (Cabinet) to study the situation of 
the "bidoons" (stateless residents of Kuwait) will refer its 
final recommendations on resolving this issue to the 
government in the next 10 days.  Two MPs have threatened to 
bring the Prime Minister and Minister of Education before a 
National Assembly no-confidence vote if a solution to the 
issue is not found. 
 
All newspapers report that Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al- 
Ahmad will begin a three-day visit to Washington at the 
invitation on President Bush beginning September 9. 
 
Al-Watan reports on August 26 that Kuwaiti border patrols 
foiled an attempt to smuggle liquor and weapons from Iraq. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Terrorism or Resistance" 
Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (8/25: 
"Leaders of the free world, the Arab League, the UN 
Secretary General and the Iraqi Transitional Governing 
 
SIPDIS 
Council have condemned the bombing of the UN headquarters in 
Iraq. Only the Arab satellite channels, which support the 
defunct Iraqi regime and are anti-America, proclaim it as 
the work of nationalists fighting to liberate Iraq from the 
so-called foreigners." 
 
¶4.  "The Wonders of Arabs in the Devil's Countries" 
Saleh Al-Shayiji wrote in independent Al-Anba (8/25): 
"After the September 11 attacks, Arabs who reside in the 
Devil's countries [America and the West], appeared on the 
satellite channels to condemn Bin Laden and apologize for 
his actions. These Arabs never tried to return to 
Afghanistan, Iraq or Palestine to defend the Arab people. 
Such Arabs. have no dignity or honor." 
 
¶5.  "The Apache Map" 
Lawyer Jamal Al-Kandari wrote in independent Al-Watan 
(8/25):  "After the Zionists murdered Abu Shanab by using 
Apache helicopters, we expected the US to condemn the attack 
and call to end Israel's aggression against unarmed 
civilians. Instead, the US ordered the freeze of assets of 
Palestinian Islamic organizations. The US had an opportunity 
to gain the sympathy of the Arab and Islamic worlds, but it 
is not possible to gain that sympathy without taking action 
against Zionist crimes." 
 
¶6.  "Unification Between America and Zionism" 
Dr. Yasser Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(8/26):  "In his weekly radio address, President Bush 
described the Palestinians resisting the Zionists and the 
Iraqi resistance against the American occupiers in Iraq as 
people who are attempting to impose their evil will on the 
civilized world. In his statement, he has unified America 
and Zionism." 
 
¶7.  "Kuwaitis and the American Embassy" 
Talal Al-Arab wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/25):  "The 
American Embassy, and any other embassy, exists to serve its 
country, not ours. The American Ambassador is one of the 
most frequent visitors of all Ambassadors to diwaniyas 
[Kuwaiti men's gatherings], recognizing their social and 
political influence in the country. He is the most liked 
foreign Ambassador for understanding the role of diwaniyas, 
and for accepting Kuwaiti's criticism. The only suspicious 
movements around are the movements of the radical groups who 
were detained lately by the Kuwaiti security forces." 
 
¶8.  "What Are We Going to Say to the Residents of New York?" 
Khalil Haidar wrote in independent Al-Watan (8/27): 
"Religious extremism and terrorism have destroyed the image 
of Arabs and Muslims in the world. Our religion has become 
the religion of violating laws, of weapons, of bombings and 
the hijacking of planes. In two weeks, we will see the 
anniversary of the September 11 crime, the attack which we 
denied and accused others of committing. So what will we say 
on September 11, 2003?" 
 
 
URBANCIC