This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 001328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET PINS ASEC PREL PGOV NI
SUBJECT: RENEWED WARRI VIOLENCE A CAUSE FOR CONCERN 
 
REF: REUTERS REPORT-03AUG03 1904GMT 
 
 
1.(SBU) SUMMARY:  Inter-ethnic violence has erupted again in 
the Warri region, this round initiated by the Itsekiris. 
There have been indications that the military heretofore 
passively deployed to the area are preparing to be more 
assertive.  This latest spasm might make the prospects for 
military intervention to stop the inter-ethnic fight and to 
secure oil production more likely. END SUMMARY 
 
 
2.(SBU) Embassy Corporate Responsibility Officer (CRO) was 
contacted early August 3 by the security manager for Shell's 
Western Operating Region, which encompasses Warri. The 
manager reported violence in the Warri creeks caused by 
Itsekiri militants.  According to Shell and, later, a 
Lagos-based Reuters report (ref), Itsekiri militants attacked 
three villages in the Warri area late August 2.  Local 
sources claimed 10-25 deaths but the total is unconfirmed. 
 
 
3.(SBU) CRO on August 3 contacted Daniel Ekpedibe, a leader 
of the Ijaw militant's Federated Niger Delta Ijaw Communities 
(FNDIC), who claimed three Ijaw villages near Koko in Warri 
North local government area (LGA) and one village across from 
the Warri refinery in Warri Southwest LGA were attacked and 
destroyed by armed Itsekiri youth.  According to Ekpedibe, 15 
were killed in the Warri North attacks and 10 in the attack 
near the refinery.  (Note: This latter attack took place 
within site of Warri town. End Note)  While angered by the 
attacks, the militant leader asserted FNDIC would not 
retaliate, but would be compelled to action should the 
Itsekiri seek further damage.  Ekpedibe's account of the 
attacks were later corroborated by Joel Bisina (ethnic Ijaw), 
head of Warri-based NGO "Niger Delta Professionals for 
Development." 
 
 
The War is Back 
--------------- 
 
 
4.(SBU) Bisina disclosed that he had attended an emergency 
meeting held by Ijaw militants in Warri August 3 and was 
convinced that reprisals were imminent.  Throughout the day, 
police and military forces in Warri Town reportedly fired 
shots in the air in a show of force to dissuade any attacks 
within the oil city.  According to Bisina, many Ijaw believe 
Sapele, about 50 kilometers from Warri, is the staging area 
for Itsekiri militants and may likely be a target for future 
Ijaw actions.  Bisina has also heard unverified reports that 
the army was planning to mobilize in an operation against 
Okerenkoko and Egbema, two villages in the Warri swamp 
considered the bases of the militant members of the Gbaramatu 
and Egbema clans, respectively. 
 
 
5.(SBU) Comment:  The Warri conflict has taken a sharp turn 
for the worse, which will make thus far unsuccessful attempts 
at a political settlement even more difficult.  If the 
fighting continues, at the rate of loss of life and property 
damage, the military will be hard pressed not to intervene. 
Yet any such intervention will raise the possibility of 
heavy-handedness by the military.  The Ijaw militants, not 
known for self-restraint, will likely strike back soon, 
notwithstanding Ekpedibe's disavowals. While Sapele may be 
viewed as the base for Itsekiri militants, the Itsekiri 
villages surrounding the huge Chevron tank farm and terminal 
in Escravos also present attractive targets for Ijaw reprisal 
attacks.  These villages have been the victims of past Ijaw 
exertions. Such attacks (as in March 2003) could complicate 
the operations of this terminal that handles 440,000 barrels 
of oil production per day. 
LIBERI