This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001303 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS MASS LI NI ECOWAS
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: PLANNING FOR LIBERIA 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 213493 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1283 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY CDA DAWN LIBERI; REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) According to current GON planning, the 19th 
Motorized Infantry battalion (i.e. NIBATT 15 in UNAMSIL) 
and the 26th Infantry battalion from Sokoto will deploy to 
Monrovia.  Combined manpower of the two battalions is 1,375 
men.  The GON had indicated a willingness to deploy OFR- 
trained NIBATT 14 from Sierra Leone to Liberia based on our 
request; however, apparently UNAMSIL has opposed the 
redeployment of NIBATT 14 to Liberia. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) DATT discussed the Liberia deployment with Chief of 
Army Staff (COAS) LTG Agwai July 29 (REF B).  The COAS 
could not give a definitive date for the Nigerian 
deployment as their planning has not been finalized and 
much of it is dependent on external factors such as 
provision of logistical support and lift from prospective 
international donors.  However, the COAS seemed less 
committed to the Nigerian general staff's previous 
endorsement of a "backward planning sequence" which would 
make Nigerian deployment dependent on a reliable timetable 
for the follow-on deployments from fellow ECOWAS states. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) The COAS said the Nigerians would not need 
uniforms, personnel equipment, basic medical support, field 
kitchens or weapons.  He said the GON would be able to find 
enough soft-skinned vehicles for the Sokoto battalion; he 
did not know the status of NIBATT 15's vehicles.  He also 
said the Sokoto battalion would deploy with minimal basic 
load of ammunition, and would need resupply quickly once in 
Liberia.  The Sokoto battalion is at 90% personnel 
readiness and could deploy as soon as equipment and 
transport issues have been resolved.  Finally, Agwai said 
the GON could provide 24-30 Warsaw Pact infantry fighting 
vehicles (BMPs) for Liberia but needed assistance with 
transport and ammunition. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) The COAS said the Nigerian battalions would require 
further donor support in the way of attack helicopters, at 
least one transport helicopter for the Force Commander 
(Nigerian BG Okwonko), logistics support to include 
ammunition resupply in Liberia, communications, air and sea 
lift for the battalion and armored personnel carriers, 
ammunition for the APCs and barrier material. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Post has been unable to raise pertinent reftel 
points with ECOWAS Executive Secretary Chambas or MG Diarra 
due to their prolonged absence from Abuja and presence in 
Accra.  Post would suggest that Embassy Accra also attempt 
to raise these points with Chambas and/or Diarra if 
possible.  Post will continue to press ECOWAS and the GON 
for a quick deployment and will report further as more 
information becomes available. 
LIBERI