This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T THE HAGUE 002911 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR PM/RSAT, EUR/UBI, EUR/RPM, JOINT STAFF FOR 
J-3/JODCENT, J-5 IPMC COALITION CELL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS IZ AF NL
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE TO DUTCH ON REQUEST FOR CS/CSS FOR OIF 
AND OEF 
 
REF: A. STATE 318096 
 
     ¶B. STATE 321138 
     ¶C. THE HAGUE 2726 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY POLITICAL COUNSELOR MARY DALY FOR REASONS 
1.5 (B AND D) 
 
¶1. (S) PolMilOff delivered ref A request for Combat 
Support/Combat Service Support (CS/CSS) assets to Dutch MFA 
Security Policy Bureau Operations Chief Rob Gabrielse on 
November 17.  Gabrielse (protect throughout) said the GONL 
was currently focused on the renewal of the deployment of 
Dutch forces in AlMuthanna province in Iraq (due to expire 
December 31) for another six months.  The Cabinet is expected 
to approve an extension on November 21.  While he thought the 
extension would go through, Gabrielse said he expected a 
robust debate in Parliament in the wake of the attack on 
Italian forces in Nasiriyah.  Gabrielse felt a decision to 
renew the deployment was of the highest political importance 
and would send a strong signal of allied commitment to Iraq 
in the wake of the attack on the Italians. 
 
¶2. (S) Concerning ref A additional requests for Iraq, 
Gabrielse said his initial reaction was that the Dutch want 
to know more about U.S. plans to turn over power to a 
transitional Iraqi government which would add a new dimension 
to the Dutch decision-making process (Note:  post delivered 
ref B points to GONL on November 19).  He noted that the 
CS/CSS assets requested would be deployed outside the current 
area of Dutch operations in AlMuthanna.  This will raise 
questions under Article 100 of the Dutch constitution (Note: 
this refers to the elaborate Dutch approval process for 
military deployments, in which the government must fully 
explain the lines of command, the risks involved, etc.) 
Lastly, Gabrielse said he was not certain MOD had the assets 
available.  That said, he advised PolMilOff he would 
immediately inject these points into the GONL's 
deliberations. 
 
¶3. (S) On Afghanistan, Gabrielse said the GONL is still 
contemplating further involvement on the ground to include 
acceding to a German request for participation in the Konduz 
PRT, responding to NATO requests to address such ISAF 
shortfalls as running Kabul Airport, or deploying a small 
contingent of special operations forces (SOF) in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom.  So far, the political leadership 
has been inclined to favor participating in the German-led 
PRT at Konduz.  On SOF, Gabrielse noted ref A suggestion of a 
dialogue on this issue between the U.S. and the Dutch 
representative at CENTCOM in Tampa.  Gabrielse underlined 
that such a discussion could only be exploratory in nature, 
and that the Dutch representative would not be in a position 
to make any commitments.  That said, he thought it would be 
helpful if the U.S. could provide more information about how 
Dutch SOF assets might be employed.  As reported ref C, the 
GONL was expected to address follow-on Dutch involvement on 
the ground in Afghanistan in November. 
 
¶4. (S) Comment:  Gabrielse's (a DAS-level official) comments 
represent an initial reaction.  MFA is seized with getting 
the current deployment of Dutch troops to AlMuthanna extended 
this week.  While technically a Cabinet approval will amount 
to a final decision, Parliament must still debate the matter 
and they will likely ask tough questions of FM de Hoop 
Scheffer and Defense Minister Kamp.  We expect the deployment 
to be renewed.  PM Balkenende, as well as Kamp and de Hoop 
Scheffer, have gone on record as saying the Dutch "can't 
simply walk away."  Mission will continue to press ref A 
request with Dutch counterparts.  End Comment. 
SOBEL