This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006184 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DHS FOR BCIS 
ATHENS AND ROME FOR BCIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2013 
TAGS: PREF PREL PGOV KPAL IZ JO
SUBJECT: PRM PDAS GREENE DISCUSSES NEW IRAQI REFUGEE 
CASELOAD AND IRAQ SECURITY CONCERNS WITH GOJ, UN AND ICRC 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 6177 
     ¶B. AMMAN 6028 
 
Classified By: DCM David M. Hale for reasons 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) In separate meetings on the margins of the UNRWA 
major donors meeting, GOJ and UNHCR officials told PRM PDAS 
Greene that the refugee camps on the Iraqi-Jordanian border 
were increasingly problematic.  The GOJ continues to advocate 
consolidation of the camps in no-man's land, while UNHCR 
prefers consolidation at the camp in Ruwaished.  UNHCR 
reported that continuing security difficulties in Iraq 
preclude a return of this caseload in the near future.  UN 
ResCoord told Greene that the September 22 bombing at the UN 
parking lot in Baghdad likely would prompt a further drawdown 
of UN staff in Iraq and that the UN would be able to resume 
full operations only when the U.S. could provide adequate 
security for its own staff in Iraq.  Security considerations 
also have impaired the ICRC's ability to fulfill its mandate 
in Iraq, prompting it to relocate staff to Amman where they 
will perform short missions to Iraq.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Prior to his participation in the September 23 UNRWA 
major donors meeting (septel), PRM PDAS Rich Greene held 
separate meetings with GOJ Minister of State for Foreign 
Affairs Shaher Bak, UN Resident Coordinator Christine McNab, 
UNHCR Representative Sten Bronee and ICRC Delegate Guy Mellet 
to discuss the new Iraqi refugee caseload as well as current 
security conditions in Iraq.  DCM and refcoord (notetaker) 
accompanied Greene on his call on Bak, while refcoord 
accompanied Greene on his UN ResCoord, UNHCR and ICRC calls. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
GOJ and UNHCR Agree Border Camps Problematic, 
Disagree on Solutions 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) In a September 22 meeting with Minister of State for 
Foreign Affairs Shaher Bak, PRM PDAS Greene urged the GOJ to 
allow the UNHCR refugee camp at Ruwaished to remain open 
until a solution could be found for the camp's remaining 550 
residents.  Briefing Bak on U.S. refugee resettlement policy 
and ongoing efforts to improve conditions inside Iraq, Greene 
emphasized that the international community is deeply engaged 
in finding a solution for the new war-related caseload but 
that the solution will take time.  Greene pledged that the 
U.S. would raise the new caseload at the upcoming UNHCR ExCom 
meetings in Geneva. 
 
¶4.  (C) Bak responded that the GOJ has significant concerns 
about the Ruwaished refugee camp and the no-man's land camp, 
including the strain on water resources posed by the 
refugees, the camps' incompatibility with GOJ plans to 
develop a free trade zone on the Iraqi border, and 
unspecified "security problems" and smuggling inside the 
no-man's land camp.  (The meeting was held just one day 
before violent protests broke out at the Ruwaished refugee 
camp, resulting in the serious injury of two rejected asylum 
seekers, reported ref a.)  He added that the GOJ planned to 
send police to search both camps in the near future.  Bak 
said that the GOJ would consolidate the two camps in the 
no-man's land area but that the Minister of Interior's 
publicly reported October 15 deadline to close the Ruwaished 
refugee camp was "not true."  Once security conditions in 
Iraq permitted the return of refugees, Bak continued, the GOJ 
would "immediately" ask the U.S. to facilitate the return of 
the new caseload refugees.  Bak urged the U.S. to quickly 
turn over responsibility for refugee issues to Iraqi 
officials, as it politically would be much easier for the GOJ 
to work with Iraqis on the organized return of Iraqi 
refugees. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In a separate September 22 meeting, UNHCR 
Representative Sten Bronee told Greene he feared the GOJ 
would move precipitously to close the UNHCR refugee camp at 
Ruwaished.  Detailing the worsening protection conditions 
inside the no-man's land camp (ref b), Bronee said that UNHCR 
preferred to move the no-man's land population to the 
Ruwaished camp, where UNHCR and the GOJ could ensure better 
protection and security for the refugees.  Bronee cautioned 
that continuing instability in Iraq, coupled with the 
complete withdrawal of UNHCR staff from Iraq, would make it 
very difficult for UNHCR to find solutions for the new 
caseload.  Returns to Iraq for either the Iraqi-Palestinians 
or the Al Tash Kurds was now out of the question, as UNHCR 
did not have adequate staff in place to oversee the returns 
or provide assistance to the refugees once they had returned 
to Iraq.  Bronee said he would continue to urge the U.S. and 
other resettlement countries to consider creative solutions 
for this caseload, as local integration in Jordan was not an 
option. 
----------------------------------------- 
UN and ICRC:  Security Conditions in Iraq 
Make it Impossible to Fulfill Mandates 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In a September 22 meeting, UN Resident Coordinator 
Christine McNab predicted that the bombing earlier that day 
at the UN parking lot in Baghdad would prompt the UN to 
withdraw all remaining international staff from Baghdad. 
Based on conversations with Kevin Kennedy, Officer-in-Charge 
of UN Operations in Baghdad, McNab expected Kennedy to 
recommend the UN move to security phase 5 in Iraq.  McNab 
added that the bombing -- which seemed to have been targeted 
at UN local staff -- would make it impossible for the UN to 
run humanitarian operations "by remote" (e.g., with local 
staff implementing programs directed by a skeleton 
international staff) as the UN no longer could ask its local 
staff to continue to operate in the face of proven dangers. 
McNab said the UN should only consider bringing its 
international staff back to Iraq when the U.S. could provide 
adequate security for its own staff -- including troops -- in 
Iraq.  As of September 22, nearly 400 UN international staff 
from Iraq were in Amman.  Greene gave an overview of 
coalition efforts to improve security including police, 
Facilities Protective Services, Iraqi Border Guards, the 
Iraqi Civil Defense and the new Iraqi Army 
 
¶7.  (SBU) ICRC Delegate Guy Mellet echoed these concerns in a 
September 23 meeting with Greene, reporting that security 
issues continued to limit the ICRC's ability to fulfill its 
mandate in Iraq.  Reporting that ICRC had moved its Iraq 
protection and tracing teams to Amman, Mellet said that 
current security conditions in Iraq made it impossible for 
the ICRC to maintain a full-time presence for certain teams. 
The protection and tracing teams would travel into Iraq to 
perform short missions only.  Mellet told Greene that a 
radical change in the current security environment -- in 
which even neutral ICRC staff had been targeted -- would be 
required before ICRC could return staff to Iraq. 
 
¶8.  (U) PDAS Greene cleared this message. 
 
¶9.  (U) CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM