This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ROME 003214 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2013 
TAGS: EU IS IT KPAL PREL EUN
SUBJECT: MID-EAST PEACE PROCESS: WHAT TO EXPECT OF ITALY AS 
PRESIDENT OF THE EU ON THE MEPP 
 
REF: A. ROME 2766 
 
     ¶B. ROME 2646 
 
Classified By: POLITICAL MINISTER COUNSELOR THOMAS COUNTRYMAN FOR REASO 
NS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Italy has identified the MidEast Peace 
Process as among its top foreign policy priorities during its 
EU Presidency (July-December 2003).  PM Berlusconi has 
consciously upgraded Italy's relations with Israel to balance 
its traditional close ties to the Palestinians and make the 
GOI better able to collaborate closely with the USG within 
the Quartet.  At the same time, it is conscious that EU 
decision-making process, and continued Israeli distrust of 
the EU, will limit its ability to innovate -- we should not 
expect the Italians to single-handedly reverse the feeble EU 
record in the peace process.  Italian hopes of replacing 
Moratinos with an Italian candidate appear to be fading.  PM 
Berlusconi and FM Frattini would like Italy to host the first 
of two international peace conferences called for by the 
roadmap in Sicily in Fall 2003 (Refs A-B).  Israeli, 
Palestinian and Egyptian representatives in Rome share our 
view that Italy's balanced ties at least give a basis for 
hope that the Italian Presidency has an opportunity to make 
the EU contribution to the peace process more visible and 
productive.    End summary. 
 
BALANCING TIES WITH ISRAEL AND PALESTINE 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Since taking office two years ago, Berlusconi has 
consciously sought to improve Italy's ties with Israel. 
Besides hosting PM Sharon early in their respective tenures, 
Berlusconi has gone out of his way to keep in phone touch 
with the Israeli leader.  Of greater substance, a succession 
of Italian technical ministers (communications, industry, 
transportation, science) have visited Israel or hosted their 
Israeli counterparts and signed substantive cooperation 
agreements.  This has been accompanied by a conscious shift 
away from the traditional GOI support for Arafat, who 
Berlusconi once courted with money from his own pocket. 
Primarily at the request of President Bush, Berlusconi has 
avoided direct contact with Arafat for over a year, and he 
told visiting Israeli President Katsav last year that he 
would "never" again see Arafat.  (This private comment was 
immediately given to the press by the Israeli Embassy).  The 
GOI has in turn balanced the shunning of Arafat with the 
continuation of the annual subsidy that keeps afloat the 
Palestinian "embassy" in Rome and -- more theoretically -- 
with Berlusconi's proposal of a "Marshall Plan" for 
Palestinian economic development.  This re-balancing is 
consistent with Berlusconi's personal politics and with his 
desire to align his foreign policy as close as possible to 
President Bush's.  Italian diplomats have made clear that 
they hope it has the added benefit of more Italian 
credibility with the US - and a higher EU profile - within 
the Quartet. 
 
------------------------------------- 
WITHIN THE QUARTET, AND WITHIN THE EU 
------------------------------------- 
¶3. (C) The Italians are conscious -- as we should be -- that 
their ability to make the EU a more effective player will be 
limited by the EU's own history (which has led to Israel's 
distrust of the EU) and tortured decision process.  For 
example, Berlusconi was eager to make his recent visit to 
Israel before assuming the EU Presidency, knowing that it 
would be harder to keep his promise (made personally to 
President Bush) not to see Arafat once he wore the EU 
President's hat.  His haste to make the visit probably 
contributed to the less-than-subtle way that he avoided an 
Arafat meeting, which generated in turn criticism from the 
French and other EU ministers that his snubbing was 
inconsistent with agreed EU policy.  Though Berlusconi shot 
back with a tried-and-true one-liner (De Villepin "missed a 
great opportunity to keep quiet"), the fact remains that the 
Italians start in a hole in terms of bringing the EU policy 
around to a similar re-balancing.  FM Frattini has stated 
publicly Italy's desire to have the EU gain a "higher 
profile" within the Quartet.  If this is supported by the US 
(Berlusconi may raise it in his July 20 call on the 
President), it would vindicate Berlusconi's re-balancing 
approach. 
 
¶4. (C) We expect the GOI will be closer to the USG, within 
the Quartet, than recent EU presidencies.  In the Italian 
 
 
view, the most positive factor in the current process is the 
personal commitment of President Bush.  Berlusconi believes 
that he can take advantage of a close personal relationship 
with the President to support and share that commitment.  It 
will do so by seeking to establish EU positions that will be 
more consistent with the US view, and by coordinating closely 
with the US on any diplomatic mission to the region.  It 
should also be more willing than recent EU Presidents to - 
rapidly - add the weight of the EU Presidency to any pressing 
of either the Palestinians or Israel that the US finds 
necessary.  The GOI will run the risk of being yanked back by 
EU colleagues if it pushes too far (e.g., if Berlusconi were 
again to snub Arafat).  They are realistic, knowing that the 
real role of the Italian Presidency is limited, all the more 
so as Solana appears determined to keep a tighter rein on the 
process by naming as Moratinos' successor someone more 
dynamic and closer to Solana himself.  But this limitation 
will not prevent the Italian representatives 
(Director-General for Middle East Ricardo Sessa or Eastern 
Med office director Luca Ferrari) at any Quartet meeting from 
speaking out strongly.  Both have strong experience with the 
region, the full confidence of the Berlusconi government, and 
(especially Ferrari, the main architect of the GOI's 
rebalancing) a pre-disposition to agree with the USG. 
 
¶5. (C) More publicly, the GOI would like to make four 
distinctly Italian contributions to the peace process, most 
of them long shots: 
-- The candidacy of Ambassador to Damascus Laura Mirachian to 
replace Moratinos as special EU envoy, once hopeful, now 
appears all but finished.  At best, the GOI looks forward to 
working with a replacement who will be "more competent and 
less jaded" than Moratinos. 
 
-- Second, they will continue to push the idea of a concerted 
EU economic program for Palestinian development, particularly 
if there is significant progress in Phase one of the roadmap. 
 MFA officials concede it has little chance of EU approval, 
partly because of its close association with Berlusconi 
himself, and partly because this is one area of foreign 
assistance where EU states prefer to get the credit (and 
leverage) for individual contributions, rather than through 
the EU. 
 
-- Third, PM Berlusconi has restated his desire to host (in 
Erice, Sicily) the international peace conference called for 
in the second phase of the roadmap.  In his June meeting with 
Berlusconi, Sharon did not object to the idea as long as the 
situation on the ground corresponded to what it should be at 
the end of phase I of the roadmap (Ref A). Luca Fratini, 
Ferrari's deputy, recently outlined what the MFA saw as key 
to reaching that goal: that the US encourage Israel to 
continue the settlement freeze; that the US discourage Israel 
from building a security fence; and the adequate functioning 
of a multinational implementation monitoring mechanism.  (FM 
Frattini, in a June 11 speech at the Center for Defense 
Studies in Rome praised the President's decision to send the 
first group of American observers to the region, saying that 
the roadmap cannot be carried out unless there was a 
monitoring mechanism on the ground.  He added that Italy, 
with a demonstrated expertise in monitoring work, stands 
ready to assist if called upon by the US (ref B). 
 
-- Fourth, Berlusconi has invited Abu Mazen to Rome, ideally 
in July (at this moment, it seems unlikely that this will 
occur before September).  At this point, the GOI has no 
concrete objective for that meeting, but we are confident it 
will consult closely with the USG as soon as the meeting is 
scheduled. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
ISRAELI, PALESTINIAN AND EGYPTIAN VIEWPOINTS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Israel is optimistic about the Italian Presidency 
because it will be a "balanced Presidency," said Ofer Bavly, 
the spokesman of the Embassy of Israel in Rome. Israel 
considers Berlusconi to be more balanced on the 
Israeli/Palestinian issue than previous Italian governments 
and EU presidencies.  Given Italy's excellent relations with 
Israel and with the Arab world, Bavly expected Italy to play 
a positive mediation role that other EU countries cannot. 
Israel will always look to the US for the leading mediation 
role in the MEPP, but does not mind a greater EU role in the 
MEPP as long as the EU views are balanced and the EU plays a 
complementary role to that of the US, said Bavly. 
 
 
¶7. (C) As far as tangible steps Italy could play during its 
Presidency, Bavly suggested that the EU ought to apply 
pressure on the PA, Syria, and other countries in the region 
that get economic aid from the EU to commit seriously to 
fighting terrorism.  He did not expect Italy to put any "real 
pressure" on Israel during its Presidency because the 
Berlusconi government has a "far greater understanding" of 
Israel's security needs than did previous Italian governments 
and EU Presidencies.  Bavly expected any concrete 
achievements during the Italian Presidency to come through 
the Quartet.  Israel expects Italy to coordinate well and not 
to compete with the US in the Quartet.  Israel wants to see 
the US and the EU work well together within the Quartet, not 
the US supporting Israel and the EU supporting the Arabs, 
said Bavly. 
 
¶8. (C) Nemer Hamad, the senior PA representative in Rome, 
expected Italy to coordinate equally within the 15 EU members 
and the USG on the MEPP during its Presidency.  It will not 
be Italy as an individual country that is calling the shots, 
predicted Hamad, but as the EU President within the Quartet 
and in full coordination with the US.  Full unrestricted 
acceptance of the roadmap by both parties is an indispensable 
starting point for any serious progress in the region. 
Without that, even the best intentions of the Quartet will be 
of little help, insisted Hamad. 
 
¶9. (C) As long as the EU does not have a common foreign 
policy, it will not be able to exert useful pressure on 
either side, said Hamad.  In order for the EU to serve as a 
mediator in the Israeli/Palestinian conflict, it must be 
accepted by both parties.  In that sense, Italy, with its 
excellent ties to both the Arab world and Israel, could play 
a key coordination role within the Quartet, between the EU 
and the US, having the trust of both Israelis and 
Palestinians.  Italy's success during the Presidency will 
depend primarily on Sharon's continued willingness to 
implement the roadmap --the only possible road to an eventual 
peace-- and the US' willingness to pressure Sharon to do 
that, said Hamad. 
 
¶10. (C) The real test for Italy and the international 
community is the implementation of the roadmap, said Ahmed 
Adel, NEA Watcher at the Embassy of Egypt in Rome.  The MEPP 
will give Italy an opportunity to reunite the EU politically 
after its political division over Iraq and will give 
Berlusconi the opportunity to play an important and visible 
leadership role at the international level.  Italy should use 
its positive relations with Iran and Syria to convey actively 
the US message that Iran and Syria should not disrupt the 
progress of the MEPP.  Italy and the EU could and should play 
a positive role in the monitoring mechanism because they 
understand well the reality of the situation on the ground 
both for Palestinians and for Israelis.  When implementation 
of the roadmap proves difficult, Italy should play a balanced 
role, acknowledging the reality and challenges faced by both 
sides, said Adel. 
Sembler 
NNNN 
 2003ROME03214 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL