This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RANGOON 001489 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO SOCI PGOV EAID PHUM PREL BM NGO
SUBJECT: EXPOSING RISKS OF HIV/AIDS IN BURMA 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  The Ministry of Health held Burma's second 
annual HIV/AIDS exposition in Rangoon, attracting 70,000 
visitors, raising HIV/AIDS awareness, and administering 
on-site HIV/AIDS tests to those interested.  However, whether 
the expo successfully reached Burma's high-risk populations 
is unknown.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  The GOB held its second annual HIV/AIDS exposition in 
downtown Rangoon on Nov. 4 - 9, drawing PM Gen. Khin Nyunt 
and daily crowds of 10,000 visitors.  It was so well attended 
in fact that authorities extended the expo until November 12. 
 Representatives from the Ministry of Health, along with 
UNAIDS, UNICEF, WHO, UNDP, Population Services International 
(PSI), Medecins Sans Frontieres-Holland, Myanmar Maternal and 
Child Welfare Association, Myanmar Medical Association, 
Myanmar National Railways, and a host of other GOB, 
international NGO, and Government operated NGO organizations 
answered questions and handed out HIV/AIDS-related literature. 
 
¶3.  A walk around the exposition hall made it clear the event 
was designed to raise awareness and educate at all levels -- 
curious citizens, government employees, and thousands of 
visiting school children -- on the risks and consequences of 
activities that can spread HIV/AIDS.  Frank and sometimes 
graphic presentations of HIV/AIDS transmission vectors and 
HIV/AIDS symptoms adorned the walls of many of the booths. 
Visitors were given a plethora of professionally produced 
pamphlets on HIV/AIDS issues, including themes of 
heterosexual and homosexual transmission, intravenous drug 
use transmission, mother-fetus transmission, home-based care 
for family members living with HIV/AIDS, and also effective 
use of male and female condoms. 
 
¶4.  In addition to educating, the Ministry of Health also 
administered "confidential" HIV/AIDS tests and counseling on 
site, and by day seven of the expo had drawn blood from over 
130 visitors.  The Ministry also showcased an HIV/AIDS 
counseling telephone hotline reportedly available to the 
public throughout the year. 
 
¶5.  COMMENT:  Whether the exposition successfully targeted 
high risk groups was hard to gauge, but it was heartening to 
see the general population so well represented in the 
audience.  Though the confidentiality of the HIV/AIDS tests 
offered on site was impossible to determine, the Ministry 
official staffing the booth seemed firmly convinced that the 
testing process and results would be kept confidential.  The 
GOB will mark World AIDS day on December 1 with a low-key 
field day in a Rangoon Park, co-sponsored by UNAIDS and the 
Ministry of Sport. 
Martinez