This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ZI
SUBJECT: BISHOPS MEET MUGABE AND TSVANGIRAI SEPARATELY IN 
BID TO RESTART NEGOTIATIONS 
 
REF: HARARE 801 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) Three prominent Bishops from Manicaland, all 
affiliated with the Zimbabwe Council of Chufches (ZCC), met 
with President Mugabe and MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai 
recently in an attempt to restart failed talks between the 
ruling and opposition parties.  Mugabe raised a few issues he 
said were causing the impasse - mostly dealing with 
recognizing his legitimacy.  By indirect reply, Tsvangirai 
said the MDC would not bring up the issue of legitimacy. 
Both sides have reportedly agreed to submit letters to the 
Bishops in the coming weeks outlining their positions.  While 
it is too early to tell whether this mediation effort will 
gain traction, early signs, such as the fact that Mugabe 
actually agreed to meet with the Bishops, and that he brought 
along ZANU-PF moderates rather than hard-liners, are 
encouraging.  End Summary. 
 
Bishops Meet Separately with Mugabe and Tsvangirai 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. (U) On July 25, a group of prominent Zimbabwean Bishops 
met with President Mugabe and a few of his key advisors at 
State House at the request of the Bishops to discuss 
mediation with the MDC and resolving the country's various 
crises.  The Bishops included the President of the 
Evangelical Fellowship of Zimbabwe (EFZ) Bishop Trevor 
Manhanga, the President of the Zimbabwe Council of Churches 
(ZCC) Bishop Sebastian Bakare, and the President of the 
Zimbabwe Catholic Bishops Conference (ZCBC) Bishop Patrick 
Mutume.  The Secretary General of ZCC also attended as note 
taker.  The GOZ team consisted of President Mugabe, 
Vice-President Joseph Msika, ZANU-PF Spokesperson Nathan 
Shamuyarira, Chairman of ZANU-PF John Nkomo, and Cabinet 
Secretary Willard Chiwewe.  On July 28, the Bishops also met 
 
SIPDIS 
with MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai, MDC Secretary General 
Welshman Ncube, MDC Deputy Secretary General Gift Chimanikire 
and MDC Chairperson Isaac Matongo. 
 
Manhanga Explains Bishops' Approach 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) On July 28, AIDoff met with Manhanga, who has been 
appointed spokesperson for the group.  Manhanga said the 
Bishops explained to Mugabe they were concerned about 
political polarization in the country, noting that since 
Zimbabwe successfully championed reconciliation in South 
Africa and Namibia, reconciliation could happen at home. 
 
Mugabe's Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶4. (C) According to Manhanga, Mugabe said the main issues in 
the impasse were a) his presidential legitimacy, b) the MDC's 
court challenge of the March 2002 presidential elections, and 
c) the MDC's alleged status as a puppet of the West.  The 
Bishops responded that these issues should not stop the 
resumption of negotiations.  Manhanga said the GOZ officials 
were open about the fact that sanctions were hurting them. 
The Bishops asked Mugabe for approval of a reinvigorated 
reconciliation/negotiation process, to which Mugabe responded 
that they (the Bishops) had a right to do this, and did not 
need his approval.  The Bishops asked for a letter to them 
outlining ZANU-PF's position; Nkomo was appointed to prepare 
that when he returns from Tunisia on August 6. 
 
Tsvangirai's Willingness 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (C) Manhanga said that the MDC had informed the Bishops 
that MDC planned to go ahead with its election challenge, 
currently scheduled for November 3.  If negotiations made 
good progress, however, there might not be a need to proceed 
with the challenge.  The MDC agreed not raise the issue of 
legitimacy and was also agreeable to drafting a letter 
outlining their position, which they said would be ready for 
the Bishops during the week of August 4. 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶6. (C) Manhanga reported that both sides said they favored a 
"homegrown" process, rather than one spearheaded from outside 
Zimbabwe.  He said when the Bishops have both letters in 
hand, they would announce a resumption of formal dialogue. 
The Bishops also plan to meet with the South African High 
Commissioner Jeremiah Ndou and Director-General in the South 
Africa Presidency, Rev. Frank Chikane, during the next two 
weeks.  The Bishops would like South Africa to issue a public 
statement supporting their initiative.  Manhanga said the 
Bishops view South Africa as a regional policeman, albeit 
with a weak interest in Zimbabwe.  They believe that U.S. 
support would be critical to keep South Africa "honest". 
 
¶7. (U) In a strongly worded July 23 public statement, the ZCC 
asked for forgiveness, saying they have prayed when in fact 
action was required to prevent violence, rape, intimidation, 
harassment, torture, and starvation of their flock.  EFZ and 
ZCBC also issued a joint statement during the same week 
urging Christians to pray for a resumption of dialogue 
between the ruling and opposition parties. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶8. (C) There have been many false starts to negotiations over 
the past four years, and it is too early to predict whether 
this initiative will gain traction.  On several occasions in 
the past Mugabe has agreed to talk, then backed away, walked 
out, or failed to follow through with the minimal steps 
needed to meet the opposition face to face.  That the Bishops 
finally met with Mugabe face to face is encouraging.  Even 
more encouraging is the fact that the other ZANU-PF officials 
present are from the more reasonable elements of the party -- 
hard-liners like Jonathan Moyo, Joseph Made, and Patrick 
Chinamasa, who would certainly attempt to sabotage any 
dialogue, were left out.  For its part, the MDC has 
consistently indicated its willingness to negotiate, even 
after previous initiatives were scuttled, and again is 
willing to engage in this process.  The issue now is whether 
process will ultimately give way to substance and some 
formula to break the current impasse.  End Comment. 
SULLIVAN