This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 23 HANOI 003350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/AAE, EAP/BCLTV, L/LEI 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, NDDS 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV ASEC EFIN KCRM SOCI VM CNARC HIV AIDS
SUBJECT:  2003 INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL STRATEGY 
--        REPORT (INCSR) - VIETNAM 
 
REFS: A. HANOI 2622  B. HANOI 3288 C. HANOI 1504 D. HANOI 
1885 E. HANOI 0827 F. HANOI 1043 G. HANOI 0353 H. HANOI 0549 
¶I. HANOI 3239 J. HCMC 1233 
 
¶I.  SUMMARY 
 
¶1.  (U)  The Government of Vietnam (GVN) continued to make 
progress in its counternarcotics efforts during 2003. 
Specific actions included:  sustained efforts of 
counternarcotics law enforcement authorities to pursue drug 
traffickers; increased attention to interagency 
coordination; continued cooperation with the United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); increased attention to 
drug treatment and harm reduction; an increased tempo of 
public awareness activities; and additional bilateral 
cooperation on HIV/AIDS, an issue closely related to 
intravenous drug use in Vietnam.  Additionally, In December 
2003 the GVN and the USG signed a long-delayed 
Counternarcotics agreement.   However, real cooperation with 
DEA's Hanoi Country Office was minimal.  Vietnam and the 
U.S. should be able to use the new CNA to enhance bilateral 
interaction.  Ref I addresses money-laundering issues. 
 
¶2.  (U) Vietnam is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention, 
the 1961 UN Single Convention as amended by the 1972 
Protocol, and the 1971 UN Convention on Psychotropic 
Substances.  End Summary. 
 
II.  STATUS OF COUNTRY 
 
¶3.  (U) By USG definition, Vietnam meets the legislative 
criteria as a "major drug-producing" country (at least 1,000 
hectares of poppy cultivation).  However, GVN, UNODC, and 
law enforcement officials do not consider cultivation a 
major problem.  The USG estimates 2,300 hectares of poppy 
are cultivated in the northern and western provinces of Lai 
Chau, Son La, and Nghe An, usually in remote mountain areas. 
However, this estimate is based on a year 2000 USG imagery- 
based survey.  To the best of Embassy Hanoi's knowledge, the 
USG has not updated the 2000 survey.  Accordingly, it is not 
possible to verify whether this figure is still accurate. 
The GVN claims a much lower figure (94 hectares).  Due to 
the small amount of poppy cultivation, since 2000 official 
UNODC statistical tables for illicit cultivation ceased to 
list Vietnam separately; rather, the table considers Vietnam 
within the category of "other Asian countries."  Cultivation 
in Vietnam probably accounts for about one percent of 
cultivation in Southeast Asia, according to a law 
enforcement estimate.  There appear to be small amounts of 
cannabis grown in remote regions of southern Vietnam. 
Anecdotal evidence also suggests that there may be larger 
commercial crops of hemp in remote regions in the south. 
 
¶4.  (U) Vietnam has not been considered a source or transit 
country for precursors.  According to DEA, Vietnam is 
exporting relatively large quantities of sassafras oil, a 
substance which has legitimate uses (for insecticides, soap, 
and perfume) but which can also be used as a precursor for 
the hallucinogen methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA).  DEA 
has in the past received reports that Vietnam-sourced 
sassafras oil has been connected to European MDMA 
production.  Overall, the GVN is concerned in general about 
precursors and has begun to take action.  On May 29, the GVN 
issued Decree 58, which deals with the control of, import, 
export, and transit of drug substances, precursors, 
addictive drugs, and psychotropic substances.  According to 
the decree, only businesses authorized by the Ministries of 
Health (MOH), Industry, and Public Security (MPS) can 
import/export drug substances, precursors, addictive drugs, 
and psychotropic substances for specific, licit purposes. 
The GVN has tasked MPS to coordinate with other concerned 
ministries and agencies to manage and control the 
import/export of these narcotic substances.  In an effort to 
support Vietnam's efforts to enhance its precursor control 
capacity, the GVN and UNODC signed on December 1, 2003 a 
project (G55) document titled "Interdiction and Seizure 
Capacity Building with Special Emphasis on ATS and 
Precursors." 
 
¶5.  (U) More significant drug issues in Vietnam are transit 
and the rising popularity of amphetamine-type stimulants 
(ATS).  Heroin from the Golden Triangle and the PRC transits 
Vietnam en route to Taiwan, Hong Kong, and, increasingly, 
Australia.  While UNODC views the PRC more as a source of 
heroin and, increasingly, of tranquilizers used to cut 
heroin for domestic use in Vietnam, the PRC is probably also 
a destination for some Golden Triangle heroin transiting 
Vietnam.  DEA has not yet tied any drug seizures in the U.S. 
directly to Vietnam, but reports that some may be entering 
the U.S. via Canada.  Concerning Australia, there were 
several courier seizures of heroin destined for Australia, 
demonstrating that Australia may be an increasingly 
preferred destination for heroin transiting Vietnam.  (Note: 
See Drug Flow/Transit section below for more details.  End 
note) 
 
¶6.  (U) It appears that some cannabis, heroin, and synthetic 
drugs are entering Vietnam from Cambodia.  Regarding ATS, 
GVN authorities are particularly concerned over the rising 
use among urban youth and, during 2003, increased the tempo 
of enforcement and awareness programs that they hope will 
avoid a youth epidemic situation similar to what has 
occurred in Thailand.  According to the Standing Office of 
Drug Control (SODC), ATS and ecstasy (MDMA) are still 
popular among the youth addict population, in addition to 
the ever-rising demand for heroin. (Note:  According to DEA, 
these drugs may be methamphetamines rather than MDMA.  End 
Note.) 
 
III.  COUNTRY ACTIONS AGAINST DRUGS IN 2003 
 
Policy initiatives 
------------------ 
 
¶7.  (U) The structure of the GVN's counternarcotics efforts 
is built around the National Committee on AIDS, Drugs, and 
Prostitution Control (NCADP).  Deputy Prime Minister Pham 
Gia Khiem chairs NCADP, which includes a broad spectrum of 
GVN ministries and mass organizations.  Key officials 
include four deputy chairpersons:  Minister of Public 
Security Le Hong Anh; Minister of Labor, War Invalids, and 
Social Affairs (MOLISA) Nguyen Thi Hang; Minister of Health 
Tran Thi Trung Chien; and Ha Thi Lien, Standing Member of 
the Presidium of the Fatherland Front. 
 
¶8.  (U) According to UNODC, during 2003 the GVN continued to 
focus on the drug issue.  The drug issue poses a "real 
headache" for the GVN, UNODC officials confirmed.  This also 
led to an increase in attention from the state-controlled 
media.  UNODC reported that in accordance with GVN strategic 
plans, GVN officials, without foreign donor support, 
undertook more study missions concerning drugs both within 
the country as well as to regional neighbors than in 
previous years. 
 
¶9.  (U) During a January conference organized by MOLISA 
Prime Minister Phan Van Khai called on the entire political 
system from the central to local levels to make a concerted 
effort against drugs and prostitution.  The National 
Assembly (NA) in 2003 also called for more effective 
measures against drug crimes and prostitution. 
 
¶10.  (U) According to MOLISA, in addition to national 
programs and projects, provinces and cities have implemented 
their own programs.  Some examples are Tuyen Quang with its 
effective "three stages" treatment model, Nghe An with the 
goal of "demand reduction," Ho Chi Minh City with its "three 
reductions" program, Danang with its "five nos" program, and 
Haiphong with its "three nos" program. 
 
¶11. (U) Maintaining the oft-repeated theme of international 
drug control cooperation, in 2003 GVN representatives 
routinely emphasized the importance of fighting drugs.  In 
particular, the GVN used the September 2003 Ministerial 
Meeting of the Signatory Countries to the 1993 Memorandum of 
Understanding on Drug Control to make an international media 
splash with anti-drug speeches by Deputy Prime Minister Vu 
Khoan and other luminaries (ref A).  However, DEA has 
reported that law enforcement agencies in Vietnam have still 
never participated in a bilateral drug investigation with 
any foreign country, while sometimes acting unilaterally 
upon narcotics trafficking information provided by foreign 
law enforcement agencies. 
 
¶12.  (U) Increasing efforts to support drug awareness and 
prevention, demand reduction, and treatment of drug users 
and addicts: 
 
-- The GVN views drug awareness and prevention as a 
significant objective in its fight against drugs as well as 
an integral part of its effort to comply fully with the 1988 
UN Drug Convention.  The GVN has continued a steady drumbeat 
of anti-drug propaganda, culminating in June's drug 
awareness week (the week of June 23).  During that week, 
youth and mass organizations engaged in various activities 
to spread the anti-drug message.  These included art 
contests/performances, speeches, street parades, displays of 
posters/slogans, and signing of "drug free" commitments and 
meetings/gatherings.  Recently, state-controlled television 
(VTV) and radio (the Voice of Vietnam) have begun regular 
programs called "SOS Drugs" and have been airing a series of 
anti-heroin spots.  According to Lt. General Le The Tiem, 
Vice Minister of Public Security, by June 10,000 anti-drug 
news items and articles had already been covered on the 
radio and in newspapers, and there were 14 anti-drug 
programs on four official channels of VTV.  In February 
2003, municipal sectors, agencies and steering committees of 
districts, communes, and wards in Hanoi increased local 
information, education and communication activities.  Hanoi 
Television and the Voice of Hanoi also increased the time 
volume on the current special program "Drugs SOS." 
Authorities also strengthened implementation of the 
community effort called "Search in Each Lane, each House for 
each Drug Addict" by volunteers in Hanoi. 
-- In May, Prime Minister Khai declared June 26 to be anti- 
drug day, and June to be anti-drug month.  On the occasion 
of 2003 Drug Awareness Day, various activities took place 
across the country.  In Hanoi, around 2,000 people met at a 
rally to celebrate anti-drug day in the City Park.  Deputy 
Prime Minister Pham Gia Khiem, Fatherland Front President 
Pham The Duyet, Hanoi Vice Mayor Nguyen Quoc Trieu, MPS Vice 
Minister Tiem, MOH Vice Minister Pham Manh Hung, and UNODC 
Representative Doris Buddenberg attended the event.  An anti- 
drug exhibition opened in Hanoi displaying photographs and 
children's paintings about drugs and drug addiction 
sponsored by the Ministry of Culture and Information (MCI), 
the Vietnam Art Exhibition Center, and the Supervisory Board 
on Population, AIDS, and Social Problems, on the same 
occasion.  Outside Hanoi, Youth Unions in 12 provinces of 
the Mekong Delta organized a two-day jamboree in Can Tho. 
Over 300 young people participated in art performances, 
music shows, and athletic contests.  They also met to 
discuss drug and HIV/AIDS prevention among young servicemen, 
farmers and workers.   At another meeting to celebrate the 
Day in the Mekong Delta province of Tien Giang, Women's 
Union and Public Security forces in 18 southern provinces 
and cities pledged to share their efforts to prevent and 
combat drug addiction.  Vice President Truong My Hoa 
attended the ceremony. 
 
¶13.  (U) In December 2000, the NA passed a national law on 
drug suppression and prevention.  The law came into effect 
June 1, 2001.  The Ministry of Justice (MOJ) was tasked with 
working with MPS and other relevant agencies to review 
existing counternarcotics legal documents and make 
appropriate amendments to facilitate implementation of the 
new law.  UNODC is assisting the GVN to develop these 
implementing regulations for the new law, which will allow 
law enforcement authorities to use techniques such as 
controlled deliveries, informants, and undercover officers. 
During 2003, the GVN made some progress on developing these 
implementing regulations.  As of now, the GVN has made 
public eight decrees related to the counternarcotics law. 
These decrees: 
 
-- list the narcotic substances and precursors; 
-- guide the control of lawful drug-related activities in 
Vietnam; 
-- stipulate the rehabilitation order, procedures, and 
regimes for drug addicts consigned to compulsory 
rehabilitation centers; 
-- designate family organization and community-based 
rehabilitation; and, 
-- prescribe the regime of compensation and allowances for 
individuals, families, agencies, and organizations suffering 
life, health, and property damage while participating in 
drug prevention activities. 
 
One other key decree, concerning law enforcement, has 
apparently been issued, but according to an MPS official, it 
has not been made public due to its "sensitivity." During 
2003, the GVN also issued four other decrees to: 
 
-- stipulate the rewards and commendations for individuals, 
families, agencies, and organizations recording achievements 
in drug prevention; 
-- assign responsibility on international cooperation in the 
field of drug prevention; 
-- add a number of substances to the list of narcotics and 
precursors; and, 
-- regulate the control of import, export and transit 
transportation of illicit drugs, precursors, narcotic drugs 
and psychotropic substances. 
 
A preliminary analysis by a UNODC legal official concluded 
that the decrees are "insufficient in terms of establishing 
a proper drug control legal system," however.  The decrees 
tend to focus on drug control areas, which are "generally 
less complex and controversial," the official added.  There 
is still a need for "new and proper" legal instruments in 
areas such as procedures, conditions, systems for 
investigations, international cooperation, extradition, 
controlled delivery, and maritime cooperation, according to 
the analysis.  According to a senior drug treatment policy 
maker, on December 2 the Prime Minister issued a decree on 
the conditions for the private sector to run treatment 
centers, and by early 2004, one more decree will be issued 
to replace Decree 34, in line with the Ordinance on 
Administration. 
 
¶14.  (U) In addition to these four decrees, the GVN held 
other meetings and workshops, including one workshop in 
August commissioned by the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) 
on drugs and HIV/AIDS harm reduction.  This unprecedented 
conference included international organizations such as the 
WHO as well as Vietnamese and foreign NGOs.  During the 
conference, the leader of the CPV Commission for Ideology 
and Cultural Affairs called for effective measures to "save 
the lives of those 153,000 people, who are being killed by 
drugs."  Participants noted that the recommendations of the 
workshop would be sent to the "highest level" of the CPV for 
consideration.  In September, MOH organized a conference on 
"HIV Prevention in Injection Drug Users: Scientific Evidence 
and Best Practices" to inform ministerial and provincial 
level officials on published evidence, and to discus the 
outcomes of pilot interventions in Vietnam.  The conference 
also contributed to information for use in Vietnam's 
national HIV/AIDS strategy through 2010.  During the closing 
discussions, MOH officials noted that support for HIV 
prevention strategies in no way undermines the importance of 
anti-drug strategies including supply reduction and demand 
reduction. 
 
¶15.  (U) The GVN continued to move forward in developing its 
long-term counternarcotics master plan, with the assistance 
of several foreign donors, including the U.S. and UNODC. 
The current 2001 - 2005 plan of action includes the 
following 13 projects: 
 
-- building the national master plan for drug control 
through 2010; 
-- strengthening the capacity of the national coordinating 
counternarcotics agency; 
-- implementing crop substitution programs in Ky Son 
District, Nghe An Province; 
-- strengthening the capacity to collect and use drug 
information; 
-- strengthening the capacity to prevent and arrest drug 
criminals; 
-- building and completing a counternarcotics legal system; 
-- educating students on drug awareness and prevention; 
-- strengthening drug prevention activities in Vietnam; 
-- preventing drug abuse among workers; 
-- strengthening the capacity to treat and rehabilitate 
addicts; 
-- preventing drug use among street children; 
-- reducing the demand among ethnic people; and, 
-- preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS among addicts through 
demand reduction intervention. 
 
¶16.  (U) According to SODC, almost all of the projects are 
ongoing with either foreign or domestic funding.  SODC 
officials claimed that the master plan until 2010 is 
awaiting the Prime Minister's approval, and they expected 
the plan to be finalized by late 2003 or early 2004.  SODC 
has also received support in the form of computers and a 
network from the British Government.  SODC also expressed 
satisfaction with the effective implementation of the 
(partially USG funded) Ky Son project (Phase II), and the 
recent signing of a U.S.-funded project titled "Interdiction 
and Seizure Capacity Building with Special Emphasis and ATS 
and Precursors" between MPS and UNODC. 
 
¶17.  (U) According to SODC officials, the GVN at the 
national level expended approximately USD 6 million for 
counternarcotics activities in 2003.  They confirmed that 
the expenditure continues to increase, and noted that 
spending at all government levels is many times higher.  As 
in past years, observers agree that overall lack of 
resources nonetheless continued to be a major constraint in 
counternarcotics activities. 
 
¶18.  (U) In 2003, Vietnam continued its efforts in regional 
and multilateral law enforcement coordination, key elements 
towards full compliance with the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
Vietnam has existing agreements and MOUs with the PRC, 
Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Hungary, and Russia.  In 
January 2003, Vietnam issued new regulations on 
international cooperation on counternarcotics, accompanied 
by a decree signed by Prime Minister Khai.  In June, Vietnam 
hosted the ASEAN Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational 
Crime (SOMTC).  Representatives from the PRC, the U.S., the 
ROK, Japan, the EU, and Interpol attended the meeting, in 
addition to the ASEAN members.  Also in June, Vietnam and 
Thailand agreed to sign an anti-crime treaty, and the 
Australian Federal Police (APF) opened an office in Ho Chi 
Minh City.  In July, Vietnam and Laos signed an MOU on drug 
control cooperation for 2003.  In December 2003, Vietnam, 
Laos, and Cambodia met in Hanoi to review their 
counternarcotics cooperation in 2003 and work out 
cooperative measures and orientations for the coming year. 
In June 2003, an annual meeting was organized in Thanh Hoa 
to review the drug control cooperation of three provinces of 
Thanh Hoa and Son La (Viet Nam) and Hua Phan (Laos).  An MOU 
on drug control cooperation for 2003 and the following years 
was signed at the meeting.  Regarding Thailand, NA Vice 
Chairman Nguyen Van Yeu said on 18 August in Hanoi that 
Vietnam sought closer cooperation with Thailand in the 
combat against drug trafficking and addiction.  During 2003, 
according to the SODC, Vietnamese officials made 12 working 
visits and study tours, mostly to the PRC, Burma, Laos, 
Cambodia, and Thailand.  100 Vietnamese counternarcotics 
officers were sent for training overseas and 1,000 other 
drug law enforcement officers received training at home.  In 
September, Vietnam hosted the Senior Officials Committee and 
Ministerial Meeting of the Signatory Countries to the 1993 
Memorandum of Understanding on Drug Control.  The three-day 
meeting brought together Minister-level officials from 
Burma, Cambodia, Thailand, Laos, the PRC, and Vietnam to 
discuss key drug issues and review the status of the major 
projects and subprojects that make up the Subregional Action 
Plan on Drug Control.  One of the main outcomes was to agree 
to expand the Border Liaison Offices along the borders of 
the signatory countries.  Vietnam and China have already had 
success in cross-border law enforcement liaison: in April 
2003 the Vietnamese handed over a Chinese drug dealer to 
Chinese authorities at the Mong Cai border crossing. 
 
¶19.  (U) Vietnam continued to cooperate with INTERPOL during 
¶2003.  Much of this cooperation involved assisting 
authorities from Canada, Germany, and Australia to 
investigate drug trafficking cases between overseas 
Vietnamese and criminal organizations located in Vietnam. 
 
¶20.  (U) Multilaterally, Vietnam continued to work closely 
with UNODC.  In 2002, the GVN assumed management 
responsibility for the second phase of the crop substitution 
project in Ky Son, Nghe An province.  In addition, Vietnam 
continued to participate in a UNODC subregional project for 
strengthening cross border coordination with its neighbors, 
as part of the action plan mentioned in Paragraph 18. 
 
¶21.  (U) During 2003, DEA's Hanoi Country office and Embassy 
Hanoi reported that, despite repeated statements affirming 
that law enforcement cooperation is a key component of the 
drug war, GVN law enforcement authorities, especially the 
counternarcotics police, did not provide meaningful 
cooperation to DEA's Hanoi country office.  In addition, DEA 
reported that, due to existing MPS policies, DEA agents have 
not been permitted officially to work with GVN 
counternarcotics investigators.  Generally, cooperation was 
limited to receiving information from DEA and holding 
occasional meetings.  Thus far, the counternarcotics police 
have declined to share information with DEA or cooperate 
operationally.  GVN officials generally classify drug 
information as "secret," subject to national security 
regulations, and explain this as the main reason for their 
inability to cooperate more fully with DEA (Ref b).  Even 
with new "implementing regulations" to buttress the 2001 
law, Counternarcotics Department (CND) and other drug 
enforcement agencies remain limited as to what they can 
achieve in their investigations and the impact they can make 
on the drug trade in Vietnam.  CND officers target mostly 
low-level drug distributors who remain within the narrow 
grasp of their authority and investigative capability. 
Unfortunately, even well intentioned CND officers may not 
act independently when conducting investigations and 
utilizing their authority.  According to the DEA, the GVN 
needs to update and relax its restrictive polices regarding 
the exchange of drug related information with foreign 
agencies, so that real law enforcement cooperation can occur 
in Vietnam. 
 
¶22.  (U) On a more positive bilateral note, in December the 
GVN made some significant concessions in the terms of a long- 
awaited letter of agreement on counternarcotics activities 
between the U.S. and Vietnam; the agreement was signed in 
Los Angeles by Vice Foreign Minister Le Van Bang and 
Ambassador Burghardt on December 11 during the visit of 
Deputy Prime Minister Vu Khoan.  The new agreement will 
allow for greater bilateral cooperation, especially in the 
area of training. 
 
Accomplishments 
--------------- 
 
¶23.  (U) In 2003, Vietnam continued to make progress in 
achieving full compliance with the 1988 UN Drug Convention. 
The GVN implemented four new decrees, with one concerning 
regulations on the control of import, export, and transit 
transportation of illicit drugs, precursors, narcotic drugs 
and psychotropic substances, as part of the 2001 
counternarcotics law.  On May 29, the GVN issued Decree 58, 
which deals with the control of import, export, and transit 
of drug substances, precursors, addictive drugs, and 
psychotropic substances.  According to the decree, only 
businesses authorized by the Ministries of Health, Industry, 
and Public Security can import/export drug substances, 
precursors, addictive drugs, and psychotropic substances for 
specific, licit purposes.  The GVN has tasked MPS to 
coordinate with other concerned ministries and agencies to 
manage and control the import/export of these narcotic 
substances.  As implementing regulations are developed for 
the counternarcotics law, the GVN should enhance its 
capacity to engage in counternarcotics activities within an 
appropriate legal framework.  The work begun in 2002 and 
continued in 2003 on the national master plan for 
controlling precursor chemicals is also an important step in 
this direction. 
 
¶24.  (U) In March, the GVN held a national conference to 
review counternarcotics and anti-prostitution work in 2002 
and work out plans for 2003.  Prime Minister Khai spoke at 
the conference.  In his speech, Khai emphasized the need for 
deeper awareness of the consequences of drug abuse and cited 
this problem as one of impediments to the development of the 
country.  The Prime Minister called for strong law 
enforcement measures against drugs, especially by: 
 
-- Strengthening and deepening education programs to raise 
the public awareness; 
-- Ensuring proper state management at all levels through: 
     (1) stricter implementation of the GVN's poppy 
elimination policy; 
     (2) better coordination among concerned authorities, 
including at local level, to reduce supply and demand; 
     (3) closer coordination among the police, army, and 
customs in controlling and preventing drug flows; 
     (4) tighter control over businesses and services that 
can be easily taken advantage for drug use and trafficking; 
     (5) rewards and fines where appropriate and necessary. 
--  Reorganizing and strengthening the drug enforcement 
apparatus at all levels; 
--  calling on the central standing committee of Vietnam 
Fatherland Front and its member organizations actively to 
participate in encouraging the attendance by the entire 
public in "the campaign to detect and combat social evils." 
 
¶25. (U) According to Cong An Nhan Dan (People's Police) 
newspaper, the Prime Minister issued an official letter to 
launch a nationwide counternarcotics drive during the anti- 
drug month of June.  The letter called on all ministries, 
offices, and provincial people's committees to make a 
concerted effort against drugs.  According to SODC, two 
other nationwide drives -- in March and  in September -- 
also took place in 2003. 
 
¶26.  (U) SODC also assessed highly the importance in 2003 in 
the fight against drugs as well as towards full compliance 
with the 1988 UN Drug Convention of the passage by the NA of 
Decision no. 356, approving the establishment of Department 
of Crime Statistics in the Supreme People's Procuracy. 
 
Law enforcement efforts 
----------------------- 
 
¶27.  (U) According to GVN 2003 seizure statistics (January 1 
to September 30), heroin seizures increased by about 350 
percent; marijuana seizures were up by over 40 percent; 
and, the area of poppy cultivated declined from about 315 
hectares to 94 hectares, which the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (MARD) attributed to tougher 
suppression efforts in mountain areas, especially the 
northwestern provinces of Son La and Lai Chau, which account 
for 60 percent of re-cultivation.  The total number of 
registered addicts rose from 131,000 to 152,900, an increase 
of about 17 percent.  According to SODC, the actual number 
of addicts in the country (including non-registered addicts) 
is certainly "many times higher." 
 
¶28.  (U) The GVN continued a policy of strict punishment for 
drug offenses.  Seizures of opium, heroin, and amphetamine- 
type stimulants (ATS) increased during the reporting period. 
The GVN has continued to arrest and prosecute drug 
traffickers in 2003.  According to GVN statistics, during 
the first nine months of calendar year 2003, there were 
10,000 drug cases with 16,000 suspects arrested.  If 
projected over the entire year, this represents a reduction 
of 8.7 percent in the number of cases and 9 percent in the 
number of suspects arrested, however.  DEA and other law 
enforcement entities remain concerned that most arrests 
involve relatively low-level street dealers. 
 
¶29.  (U) Drug laws remain very tough in Vietnam.  Possession 
of 100 grams of heroin or 5 kilograms of opium gum or 
cannabis resin or 75 kilograms of cannabis or opium plants 
may result in the death penalty.  For possession or 
trafficking of 600 grams or more of heroin, death by a seven- 
man firing squad is "mandatory," according to another press 
report.  Despite the tough laws, SODC reported, "drug 
trafficking continues to rise." 
 
¶30.  (U) During the year, Embassy Hanoi reported several 
large drug cases (refs c, d, and e).  In Quang Tri (one of 
the central provinces of Vietnam that borders Laos), a drug 
ring was exposed in June after Quang Tri provincial 
counternarcotics police seized 40 kilograms of heroin on a 
truck entering Vietnam from Laos via Lao Bao border gate. 
(Note:  During all of 2002, GVN law enforcement entities 
seized only about 55 kilograms of heroin.  End note)  During 
a second, more complete searchlater in the month, 
authorities uncovered an additional 33 kilograms of heroin 
hidden under 10 tons of scrap metal on the same truck.  In 
another major case, Ho Chi Minh City counternarcotics police 
arrested eight people on charges of smuggling a record 
amount of 462 kilograms of heroin over the course of the 
year.  According to Ho Chi Minh City Counternarcotics 
Police, the eight traffickers included the chief of Nghe An 
Province's Tuong Duong District Counternarcotics Police. 
The group smuggled the heroin from Laos through Nghe An to 
southern provinces for consumption.  The police suspect that 
the traffickers are linked with other organized criminal 
syndicates in Asia.   A third major case was the trial of 25 
suspects in Lai Chau Provincial Court on charges of 
trafficking 89.65 kilograms of heroin between 1996 and 2001. 
Despite these high-profile cases, lack of training, 
resources, and experience both among law enforcement and the 
judiciary continue to plague Vietnamese counterdrug efforts, 
according to law enforcement sources and UNODC. 
 
¶31.  (U) Foreign law enforcement sources do not believe that 
major trafficking groups have moved into Vietnam. 
Relatively small groups -- perhaps five to 15 individuals, 
who are often related to each other -- usually do most 
narcotics trafficking.  As Vietnam becomes a more 
"attractive" transit country, larger trafficking groups 
could become more prominent, according to DEA. 
 
¶32.  (U) Resource constraints among GVN counternarcotics 
police continued to be a major problem during 2003 
especially among provincial counternarcotics police.  Even 
SODC -- the national office for coordinating all 
counternarcotics activities -- lacked a database computer 
system until December 2002, when the British Government 
provided this assistance.  Embassy visits to Quang Ninh, 
Lang Son, An Giang, and Can Tho provinces revealed that 
counternarcotics police (and all local police) work with a 
significant lack of resources, especially specialized 
equipment.  Officials in the Cambodian border province of An 
Giang told emboffs that, in the rainy season, when the 
border area floods enough to permit boat traffic over a 
large body of water that forms over rice paddies along the 
border, policing the border is nearly impossible because the 
customs and border police have only a single boat (ref J). 
Officials in these and other provinces have consistently 
told emboffs that they would welcome additional US equipment 
and training. 
 
¶33. (U) On 18 June, the General Department of Customs 
(Ministry of Finance) and the General Department of Police 
(MPS) signed a protocol for cooperation in the combat 
against smuggling, commercial fraud, cross-border 
trafficking of illicit drugs, contraband and counterfeit 
goods. 
 
Corruption 
---------- 
¶34.  (U) The GVN continued to focus on narcotics-related 
corruption, making policy statements that made it clear that 
corruption would not be tolerated and would be severely 
punished, including the removal and prosecution of corrupt 
officials.  However, the UN, law enforcement agencies, and 
even the GVN continue to view corruption in Vietnam as an 
endemic problem that exists at all levels and in all 
sectors.  In public statements, the GVN and CPV take a 
strong stand against corruption in general, but have not 
singled out narcotics-related corruption for specific 
attention.  Colonel Bui Xuan Bien, the director of SODC, 
confirmed that "any GVN official who violates laws about 
corruption" would be prosecuted.  A major criminal case 
(that of "Mafia" chief "Nam Cam" and 154 other defendants in 
Ho Chi Minh City) included charges of corruption, in 
addition to crimes such as murder, assault and gambling. 
Two defendants had been expelled from the Communist Party of 
Vietnam's Central Committee in 2002 in connection with this 
case; one of these had also been an MPS Vice Minister. 
Another defendant had been the Deputy Supreme Prosecutor. 
154 defendants were found guilty, including numerous police 
officials.  There were six death sentences and a variety of 
other prison sentences, including life imprisonment.  On the 
day of the verdict, one of Nam Cam's top syndicate 
officials, Nguyen Van Hoa, and seventeen others were 
arrested in Japan for trafficking in heroin, according to 
press reports.  In March, nine MPS officials were found 
guilty of bribery.  In June, the People's Court in Quang Nam 
province in central Vietnam sentenced the director of a 
state-run construction company to life imprisonment for 
embezzlement.  In another case, President Tran Duc Luong 
rejected leniency pleas from two former executives sentenced 
to death for a scheme to "appropriate state property through 
graft," according to a May press report. 
 
¶35. (U) Senior GVN officials continue to speak out against 
corruption.  In late January, Prime Minister Khai visited 
MPS and emphasized the need to fight all crime and 
corruption.  In March, the Prime Minister said that 
officials who "turn a blind eye to drug-related crime will 
be punished."  In February, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MFA) spokesperson said in response to a question that the 
GVN considers the fight against corruption "an important 
task."  During a meeting in Hanoi, State President Tran Duc 
Luong called for an organizational revamp of the judiciary 
and sought greater efficiency and morality from its 
personnel to enhance the quality of trials. 
 
¶36. (U) During 2003, three counternarcotics police officers 
in Hanoi were prosecuted for taking bribes from drug dealers 
who were arrested on charges of trafficking 300 kg of opium 
and 39 bricks of heroin from Lai Chau.  Another example was 
Dao Van Thanh, Chairman of Hanoi's Thanh Xuan Trung Ward 
People's Committee, who was arrested for involvement in 
illicit drug trafficking.  His wife and his sister were also 
captured while selling 50 cartons of Bromazepam (diazepam) 
illegally to a drug store.  Subsequently, a house search 
revealed 3,119 cartons more.  The seizure included in total 
93,570 tablets of Bromazepam, USD 5,900, Lao Kip 1 million 
and a Toyota Landcruiser.  According to Hanoi Health 
Service, there are 1,500 private pharmacies in the city now, 
of which only 100 are permitted to sell psychoactive 
medicines. 
 
¶37.  (U) Vietnam does not encourage or facilitate illicit 
production or distribution of narcotic or psychotropic drugs 
or other controlled substances, or the laundering of 
proceeds from illegal drug transactions.  Recognizing the 
need for more anti-corruption assistance, the GVN signed an 
agreement with Sweden in September 2002 for research on 
socio-economic policy and anti-corruption measures.  Under 
the USD 2.7 million project, scheduled to run from the end 
of 2002 through 2005, Sweden will provide resources to 
assist Vietnam in developing appropriate anti-corruption 
policies.  While the official agreement is with the Ministry 
of Planning and Investment, the actual partner is the CPV 
and, according to an official of the Swedish Development 
Corporation, the program is "quite sensitive."  A diagnostic 
study on how to implement the program "should be started by 
the end of the year." 
 
¶38.  (U) Embassy has no information linking any senior 
official of the GVN with engaging in, encouraging, or 
facilitating the illicit production or distribution of such 
drugs or substances, or the laundering of proceeds from 
illegal drug transactions.  Concerning narcotics-related 
corruption, the GVN did demonstrate a willingness in 2003 to 
prosecute officials, though the targets were relatively low- 
level. 
 
¶39.  (U) According to UNODC, "narcotics-related corruption 
is only a very small part of overall corruption."  However, 
significant levels of official corruption exist in Vietnam. 
Both the GVN and the CPV have made combating corruption one 
of their top priorities, and senior officials have made 
unambiguous statements that not only must officials not 
engage in corruption but that they will be held personally 
responsible for such wrongdoing by their relatives and 
subordinates as well.  No such cases have yet been made 
public, however. 
 
Agreements and treaties 
----------------------- 
 
¶40. (U) With the exception of the recently-signed 
Counternarcotics LOA, the USG has no extradition, mutual 
legal assistance, or precursor chemical agreements with 
Vietnam.  The LOA includes two specific counternarcotics 
training projects.  The GVN has also repeatedly expressed an 
interest in negotiating a mutual legal assistance treaty 
with the USG. 
 
¶41. (U) Vietnam is a party to three UN Drug Control 
Conventions, including the 1961 Single Convention on 
Narcotic Drugs, the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic 
Substances, and the 1988 Convention Against Illicit 
Trafficking in Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. 
 
¶42. (U) To further its compliance with the 1988 UN Drug 
Convention, Vietnam moved ahead in 2003 to increase both 
operational and formal cooperation with neighboring 
countries and countries in the region.  From November 27-30, 
a delegation of Cambodia's Ministry of the Interior led by 
Department Director General Lieutenant General Vann Noy paid 
an official visit to Vietnam.  During the exchange, the two 
sides discussed measures to strengthen cooperation between 
Vietnam's MPS and Cambodia's Ministry of Interior in 
maintaining security along the border and combating crimes, 
including drug trafficking.  The counternarcotics police of 
Vietnam and Thailand separately pledged further to tighten 
cooperation in combating drug trafficking and abuse in 
Southeast Asia.  During a visit to Thailand by a delegation 
of Vietnam National Drug Control Office, MPS Vice Minister 
Tiem held talks with his Thai counterpart on drug related 
issues.  Tiem and his delegation members also attended 
seminars on drug law enforcement and studied Thailand's drug 
enforcement apparatus and its measures to root out drug 
offenders, especially recent campaigns in Bangkok and 
northern Thailand.  According to a January 2003 "People's 
Police" press report, from 1998 to the end of 2002 the GVN 
sent 122 delegations, including over 700 counternarcotics 
police officials, to overseas training and/or conferences. 
According to SODC and press reports, in March MPS Vice 
Minister Tiem also visited the PRC and discussed bilateral 
drug cooperation with the leadership of the PRC's Drug 
Control Committee.  In February, another GVN delegation 
traveled to Thailand to attend a regional conference on 
controlling opium poppy cultivation.  In April, Vietnamese 
and Lao provincial counterparts from Nghe An and Laos' 
Xiengkhouang provinces met to improve cross-border 
counternarcotics cooperation.  In June, Vietnam hosted the 
ASEAN Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime 
(SOMTC) and Counterterrorism as well as separate SOMTC+EU, 
SOMTC+China, SOMTC+3, and SOMTC+US sessions.  The meetings 
included a discussion on regional drug issues. Specifically, 
the Burmese delegation discussed the need for an enhanced 
regional approach. 
¶43. (U) Vietnam has counternarcotics agreements and MOUs 
with seven other countries: Burma (March 1995), Thailand 
(November 1998), Russia (October 1998), Hungary (June 1998), 
Cambodia (June 1998), Laos (July 1998), and China (July 
2001).  In 1993, with UNODC support, Vietnam signed regional 
counternarcotics MOU with the PRC, Laos, Burma, Thailand, 
and Cambodia.  The six "MOU states" agreed to cooperate on 
counternarcotics activities and, with UNODC's help, better 
coordinate their law-enforcement efforts, especially along 
the borders.  Vietnam is currently precluded by statute from 
extraditing Vietnamese nationals, but the GVN is 
contemplating legislative changes, according to an MFA 
official.  However, at the request of the USG (and in 
accordance with the 1988 UN Drug Convention), Vietnam 
acceded to two rendition requests (one each from the FBI and 
US Customs) and returned two non-citizens to the U.S., where 
they were wanted for various white collar and money 
laundering crimes. 
 
Cultivation/production 
---------------------- 
 
¶44.  (U) The GVN and UNODC confirm that opium is grown in 
hard-to-reach upland and mountainous regions of some 
northwestern provinces, especially Son La, Lai Chau, and 
Nghe An Provinces.  According to USG sources, the total 
number of hectares under opium poppy cultivation has been 
reduced sharply from an estimated 12,900 hectares in 1993, 
when the GVN began opium poppy eradication, to 2,300 
hectares in 2003.  (Note: The 2003 USG estimate is the same 
as 2000 because, to the best of Embassy Hanoi's knowledge, 
no satellite survey has been performed since 2000.  End 
Note.)   UNODC and law enforcement sources do not view 
production as a significant problem in Vietnam.  While the 
GVN does not admit that drugs are produced in the country, 
Nguyen Ngoc Tam was sentenced to death in Ho Chi Minh City 
on April 18 for involvement with a Taiwan-led drug ring that 
produced hundreds of kilograms of methamphetamines in a 
clandestine laboratory in Tan Thoi Hiep, Hoc Mon (Ho Chi 
Minh City).  There have been unconfirmed reports in past 
years -- and more recent DEA intelligence information -- 
concerning probable indication on limited ATS production, as 
well as some seizures of equipment (i.e., pill presses). 
Recultivation appears to be a minor problem in the 
northwest.  According to senior MARD official, almost 100 
hectares of poppy recultivation were found (and 90 percent 
eradicated) during 2003 in Son La, Lai Chau, Yen Bai, Lao 
Cai, and Nghe An provinces in areas where opium had been 
previously eradicated.  The official said that Son La and 
Lai Chau are responsible for 60 percent of the 
recultivation.  Concerning cannabis, there appears to be a 
small, but persistent cultivation problem in Dong Nai, An 
Giang, Binh Thuan, and Dong Thap provinces in southern 
Vietnam.  Anecdotal evidence also suggests that there may 
continue to be commercial crops of hemp in remote regions in 
the south. 
 
Eradication/crop substitution 
----------------------------- 
 
¶45.  (U) As part of its efforts fully to comply with the 
1988 UN drug convention, the GVN continued to eradicate 
poppy when found, and to implement crop substitution, 
introducing other crops such as mandarin oranges, tea, 
cinnamon, plums, herbs, hybrid corn, potatoes, and soybeans 
to replace opium poppy cultivation.  Concerning eradication, 
based on Embassy provincial visits and the UNODC, the GVN 
appears sincere in its poppy eradication efforts.  However, 
GVN officials have admitted that complete eradication is 
probably unrealistic, given the remoteness of mountainous 
areas in the northwest and extreme poverty among ethnic 
minority populations who sometimes still use opium for 
medicinal purposes. 
 
¶46.  (U) There is a major UNODC crop substitution project 
(with significant USG support) ongoing in the Ky Son 
district of Nghe An province, one of the drug "hotspots" in 
northern Vietnam.  This project, currently in its second 
phase, includes a crop substitution/alternative development 
component, where various types of fruit trees and other 
enterprises, such as beekeeping, have been implemented in 
areas formerly dedicated to poppy.  UNODC representative 
Doris Buddenberg viewed the first phase as "successful," 
with an increase in agricultural production and 
corresponding drop in drug activity.  Based on an Embassy 
monitoring visit in April (ref f), there has been progress 
in the livestock and agricultural models (the focus of USG 
assistance); however, the selection process of those 
receiving project assistance was not clear, a problem that 
UNODC is now addressing.  A similar project planned in Son 
La province, another drug area along the Lao border, will 
not proceed.  Prior to the proposed project signing, the GVN 
requested an alternate project location and more autonomy in 
administering the project.  UNODC declined to meet the GVN's 
requests; after deliberation, UNODC decided not to proceed. 
 
¶47. (U) In addition to Ky Son, the MARD has continued to 
support projects in various provinces.  The GVN, through 
MARD, independently supports crop substitution projects in 
other provinces, including Hoa Binh, Yen Bai, Ha Giang, Cao 
Bang, and Lang Son.  The GVN has tasked MARD to develop a 
national crop substitution proposal to include in the GVN's 
2001-2010 Master Plan.  To avoid indirectly encouraging 
poppy cultivation through subsidies for eradication, the GVN 
has placed all crop substitution subsidies under national 
programs to alleviate poverty in poor, mountainous regions. 
Apart from the foreign-funded crop substitution projects, 
according to a senior MARD official, this program (program 
135) is designed to promote rural development, targeted at 
especially poor, mountain communes in Vietnam.  According to 
a press report, in the four years of the program's 
implementation, the communes have already received VND 4,100 
billion (USD 266 million)  and an additional VND 274 billion 
(USD 17.8 million) from the line ministries, various 
sectors, local governments, and mass organizations.  The 
funds were used for 14,000 work items to build roads, 
schools, and health stations.  The program also helps 
decrease the number of poor households by 5 percent each 
year.  According to the MARD official, the program has 
played a crucial role in weaning rural farmers from 
dependence on poppy crops. 
 
¶48.  (U) According to MPS Vice Minister Tiem, poppy 
cultivation has been reduced sharply in the previous decade. 
Poppy cultivation has existed in 153 mountain communes in 30 
districts of eight northern and western provinces of Cao 
Bang, Yen Bai, Lao Cao, Lang Son, Nghe An, Lai Chau, Son La, 
and Hoa Binh.  Marijuana crops are scattered in some 
localities in the south, Tiem also admitted.  The GVN, 
through MARD, independently supports crop substitution 
supports projects in other provinces, including Hoa Binh, 
Yen Bai, Ha Giang, Cao Bang, and Lang Son.  During 2003, the 
GVN tasked MARD to develop a national longer-term crop 
substitution proposal to include in the GVN's 2001-2010 
Master Plan.  To avoid indirectly encouraging poppy 
cultivation through subsidies for eradication, the GVN has 
placed all crop substitution subsidies under national 
programs to alleviate poverty in poor, mountainous regions. 
According to MARD officials, they have requested a 30 
percent increase from the Ministry of Finance in MARD's 
allocation under the national poverty alleviation program. 
 
¶49.  (U) During 2003, MARD continued to develop future plans 
for crop substitution.  In November, MARD sponsored two 
seminars in Son La and Yen Bai to review 
eradication/substitution efforts and to plan for 2004 and 
beyond with representatives from districts where the 
recultivation issues are most acute.  According to a senior 
MARD official, topics discussed included: 
 
-- continuing eradication efforts; 
-- ensuring sufficient food for people (especially ethnic 
minorities) located in remote, poppy-growing areas; and, 
-- developing incentives to encourage local people to farm 
terraced rice, grow tea, cultivate fruit trees, and raise 
cows and bees. 
 
Two more conferences on poppy elimination and alternative 
development took place in December.  One  in Dien Bien city 
in the newly-created Dien Bien province included 
representatives of 12 mountain provinces including the "hot 
spot" provinces of Son La, Lai Chau, Lao Cai, Yen Bai, and 
Nghe An.  The conference looked at the eradication effort 
and worked out measures to better address the recultivation 
issue.  The second conference,cosponsored by MARD and the 
Ethnic Affairs Committee, took place in Thanh Hoa to discuss 
and learn from past experience and map out future plans for 
more effective substitution programs. 
 
¶50.  (U) When well-executed, crop substitution appears to be 
a viable program that also assists ethnic minority people in 
Vietnam's poorer, mountainous regions. 
 
Drug flow/transit 
----------------- 
 
¶51.  (U) While law enforcement sources and UNODC believe 
that significant amounts of drugs are transiting Vietnam, 
DEA has not yet identified a firm case of heroin entering 
the U.S. directly from Vietnam, although it appears some may 
be entering via Canada and Australia.  More commonly, drugs, 
especially heroin and opium, enter Vietnam from the Golden 
Triangle, making their way to Hanoi or especially to Ho Chi 
Minh City, where they are transshipped by air or sea to the 
Philippines, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, and Australia. 
According to Vietnam Television (VTV), in one case, 17 drug 
runners were arrested in Japan.  Nguyen Van Hoa was the 
ringleader who asked his subordinates to smuggle in 1.4 kg 
of methamphetamines to Japan via Osaka airport in January 
¶2003.  The gang was reported to have links with Nam Cam 
criminal syndicate.  In another case, Ho Chi Minh City 
Customs Service at Tan Son Nhat Airport discovered nearly 
700 grams of heroin hidden under the soles of a pair of 
sport shoes worn by a Vietnamese woman named Nguyen Anh Minh 
while she was completing formalities for an international 
flight.  Minh admitted trafficking heroin from Hanoi to Ho 
Chi Minh City to smuggle into Taiwan.  Every month since the 
beginning of 2003, she carried at least one shipment to 
Taiwan, police said.  Vietnamese police "cooperated" with 
their Taiwanese counterparts to bust the entire drug ring. 
 
¶52. (U) UNODC and DEA also believe that significant amounts 
of heroin and ATS are entering Vietnam from the southern PRC 
province of Yunnan.  The GVN has separately reported ATS 
shipments entering the country via Malaysia, Hong Kong, 
Laos, and Cambodia.  Australian Federal Police (AFP) sources 
have reported concern over heroin and methamphetamines 
arriving in Australia from Vietnam via couriers.  There 
appear to be increasingly strong ties between drug criminals 
in Vietnam and the Vietnamese community in Australia. 
According to reports from AFP, many Vietnamese-Australians 
were involved in drug trafficking from Ho Chi Minh City to 
Australia.  Ho Quang Vinh was arrested on April 10 while 
trafficking 949 grams of heroin concealed in two cartons of 
"Craven A" cigarettes.  An AFP official in Hanoi reported 
that 18 narcotic drug shipments from Vietnam to Australia 
were discovered and 30 drug traffickers were arrested in 
¶2003.  Some of the examples are: 
 
--  Nguyen Thi Kim Hieu, a Vietnamese-Australian, received 
life imprisonment from the Ho Chi Minh City People's Court 
for trafficking 811 grams (28 ounces) of heroin.  Hieu was 
also fined 6,500 US dollars at the March 18 trial.  Hieu had 
been arrested at Tan Son Nhat international airport as she 
boarded a flight to Sydney with the heroin concealed in six 
packages beneath her clothing.  She told the court that a 
fellow Vietnamese-Australian had paid her around 35,000 
Australian dollars (20,000 US dollars) to transport the 
drugs to Sydney; 
--  Two other Vietnamese-Australian sisters were found 
guilty of trafficking heroin and given prison terms by a 
court in Ho Chi Minh City on June 12.  Phan Thi Kim Phuong 
escaped the death penalty but was sentenced to life in 
prison, while her 14-year-old sister, Phan Ngoc Viet Phi, 
was given four years behind bars.  Phuong was paid USD 
50,000 to smuggle the heroin out of Vietnam to Australia. 
The two sisters were arrested at Tan Son Nhat airport as 
they were preparing to board a flight to Sydney with 656 
grams of heroin hidden in their clothing; 
--  Two Vietnamese-Australians -- Nguyen Manh Cuong and Mai 
Cong Thanh -- were arrested for possessing over 2 kg of 
heroin on June 17 in Ho Chi Minh City.  The heroin was 
hidden in 76 loudspeakers found at a factory raid in Tan 
Binh district, packed and ready to be shipped to Australia. 
Police said Cuong admitted to sending heroin to Australia 
successfully on many occasions.  His latest shipment was 
carried out in May, when he sent 110 loudspeakers packed 
with heroin to the U.S. via Australia. 
--  Martin Pham, a Vietnamese-Australian, was arrested at 
Moc Bai border gate in Tay Ninh province when he was 
attempting to cross the border to Cambodia.  Pham was 
identified as the kingpin of a drug trafficking organization 
of Vietnamese-Australians.  The gang bought drugs in 
Cambodia, carried them through Vietnam and then continued to 
Australia; 
--  Another Vietnamese-Australian was arrested on July 3 in 
a hotel in Ho Chi Minh City.  He was identified as a focal 
point for collecting and storing heroin in Vietnam before 
sending it to Australia by sea; 
--  Vietnamese-Australian Quach Tieu Buu and Tay Chin Kheng 
from Singapore were jailed for 20 years for drug dealing in 
Vietnam.  The pair was convicted by a court in Ho Chi Minh 
City of trafficking nearly 1,500 pills, including Ecstasy. 
Prosecutors asked for life sentences; 
--  A Frenchman, Andro Stephane Michel Auguste, was 
sentenced to 20 years in prison on May 22 by Ho Chi Minh 
City People's Court for trying to take 317 grams of heroin 
out of the country; 
--  Ho Chi Minh City narcotics police charged two Canadians 
with possession of a large stash of ecstasy tablets.  Gandy 
James Sachf and Nguyen Van Hai (also known as Sheena) were 
accused of smuggling 1,000 ecstasy pills from Europe into 
Vietnam, where they sell for about VND 200,000 (USD 13) a 
tablet; 
--  Police arrested Dang Van Thanh and Nguyen Van Tuan in 
Tay Ninh province near the Cambodian provinces of Svay Rieng 
and Kompong Cham.  They allegedly belonged to a gang of drug 
traffickers that smuggled more than 100 kg of heroin into 
Vietnam.  An official from Cambodia's Ministry of Interior 
said that the two governments are communicating about drug 
trafficking and that the two men arrested in Vietnam may be 
linked to drug smugglers who trafficked 24 kg of heroin to 
Australia in April; 
--  A 40-year-old Chinese citizen, Zhu Bo Lin, was arrested 
in December in Binh Chanh District of Ho Chi Minh City for 
trafficking  350 kg of cannabis purchased in Cambodia.  The 
police said Zhu admitted to ties with a Vietnamese group 
that regularly deals in cannabis grown in Cambodia; 
--  On September 1, the Counternarcotics Police arrested 
Huynh Yen Penh (alias A Ty), a Cambodian national who was 
the kingpin of a drug ring trafficking heroin from Cambodia 
to Vietnam.  Earlier in mid-2003, Tay Ninh border army units 
had arrested members of his gang smuggling hundreds of 
heroin bricks across the border. 
 
¶53. (U) According to Phap Luat (Law) newspaper, ketamine has 
emerged this year in Hanoi and other major cities.  Law 
enforcement agencies gave warnings of the spreading use of 
ketamine in nightclubs and discotheques, and called for 
stricter control of diversion from legal sources.  According 
to SODC, the government issued a separate decree in November 
to include ketamine and other newly emerged drugs in the 
list of prohibited substances.  In addition, Tai Ma is an 
herbal drug recently available in Hanoi in the form of twigs 
of leaves with tiny seeds.  It is smoked on tobacco-pipe and 
has cannabis-like effects. Another type that was recently 
reported in Vietnam is a yellow-color, odorless extract of 
opium called Hong bi.  This new drug was trafficked across 
the border between Vietnam and China. 
¶54.  (U) According to Cong An Nhan Dan (People's Police) 
newspaper, although the number of trafficking cases went 
down, the seriousness of the cases increased.  The ATS flow 
into the country during 2003 became increasingly 
complicated, especially in border areas.  Along the Vietnam 
- Laos border, authorities seized 95.2 kilograms of heroin, 
169.4 kilograms of opium, and 12,320 doses of ATS, 
respectively accounting for 68 percent, 64 percent, and 49.2 
percent of this year's entire total.  For the Vietnam - 
China border, the problem was mainly in Lang Son, Cao Bang, 
Quang Ninh, and Lao Cai, where most of the drugs trafficked 
are addictive pharmaceuticals, opium, and cannabis.  The 
seizures were 5.9 kilograms of heroin, 65.5 kilograms of 
opium, 295 kilograms of cannabis, and 56,399 tablets and 
vials of addictive pharmaceuticals, respectively accounting 
for 4.2 percent, 25 percent, and 24 percent of this year's 
entire nationwide amount.  Lastly, on the border between 
Vietnam and Cambodia, the most serious cases were in Tay 
Ninh, Dong Thap, Long An, Kien Giang, An Giang, and Binh 
Phuoc provinces.   Law enforcement agencies investigated 310 
cases with 700 suspects, and seized 4.14 kilograms of 
heroin, 4,521 doses of ATS, 551 kilograms of cannabis, and 
100,905 tablets and vials of addictive pharmaceuticals, 
respectively accounting for 26 percent of the number of 
cases, 3.6 percent of the number of suspects, 3.2 percent of 
the heroin amount, 18 percent of the volume of ATS, and 43 
percent of the amount of addictive pharmaceuticals 
nationwide.  Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City are still seen as 
"hotspots" for transit and consumption.  During calendar 
year 2003, authorities in the two cities investigated 3,519 
cases with 5,883 suspects, and seized 20 kilograms of 
heroin, 5,556 doses of ATS, and 100,088 tablets and vials of 
addictive pharmaceuticals, respectively accounting for 29.8 
percent of the number of cases, 30.6 percent of the number 
of suspects, 14.2 percent of the heroin amount, 22.2 percent 
of the volume of ATS, and 42 percent of the amount of 
addictive pharmaceuticals nationwide. 
 
¶55. (U) Transporting drugs by air and mail continued in 
¶2003.  During the year, foreign police agencies shared 
intelligence with their Vietnamese counterparts, leading 
seizures of 60 kilograms of heroin in Taiwan, 20 kilograms 
of heroin by the Australian police, and 30 kilograms of 
heroin in the PRC.  In addition, the number of addicts in 
Vietnam increased by 10,000 over 2002.  51 out of 64 
provinces and cities nationwide now admit to having addict 
populations.  Police forces have promised better to 
coordinate with the customs and border army authorities to 
prevent drugs flowing in through the border and ports. 
Drugs are also transiting Vietnam from Laos via Nghe An 
Province and on to Vinh City, which serves as a major port 
for land-locked Laos.  The drugs then follow similar routes 
as described above.  Since there is considerable legitimate 
commerce from Laos, law enforcement sources reported that it 
is fairly easy to employ different concealment techniques. 
Some drugs also arrive from Laos and Cambodia to Ho Chi Minh 
City and then are transshipped to Singapore, Malaysia, and 
other countries in the region. 
 
Domestic programs/demand reduction 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶56.  (U)  The GVN views demand reduction as a key component 
of the fight against drugs as well as an integral part of 
its efforts fully to comply with the 1988 UN Drug 
Convention.  Within the GVN, MCI is responsible for public 
drug control information and education among the general 
population.  The Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) 
carries out awareness activities in schools.  Anti-drug 
material is available in all schools and MOET sponsors 
various workshops and campaigns at all school levels.  In 
November, NCADP announced that, authorities had received 
over 25 million entries for a nationwide contest on "knowing 
the drug law."   In its 2003 drug activity report, SODC 
reported that the border forces played an "active role" in 
disseminating anti-drug information to border villages and 
communes.  Activities included sponsoring contests, such as 
art projects, to demonstrate local commitment against drugs. 
On several provincial trips, emboffs heard from local 
citizens (not in the presence of GVN officials) that they 
are aware of drug issues through media campaigns directed at 
the general public as well as school students, and also of 
the connection between intravenous drugs and HIV/AIDS. 
Emboffs have observed anti-drug billboards in virtually 
every town visited. 
 
¶57.  (U) UNODC views GVN drug awareness efforts in 2003 
"more or less the same" as in 2002, while assesesing that 
Vietnam has already done a "good job" in this endeavor. 
According to UNODC, awareness efforts have mostly been on 
the "formality" level, however, so these efforts have had 
minimal impact on the addict and HIV/AIDS population. 
Behavior modification is still a problematic issue for the 
GVN. UNODC believes that the challenge for Vietnam is how to 
implement awareness campaigns more regularly at the 
grassroots level, and better encourage the participation of 
the youth population.  According to UNAIDS and the GVN, just 
under 70 percent of cumulative HIV/AIDS cases in Vietnam are 
related to injection drug use.  Furthermore, HIV 
surveillance indicates that nationwide, 30 percent of 
injection drug users are HIV-infected; this percentage is 
much higher (60-80 percent) in Ho Chi Minh City and the 
northeastern provinces.  Recognizing the close link between 
drug use and HIV/AIDS, the GVN in 2003 continued a public 
information campaign regarding HIV/AIDS awareness and the 
connection between drugs and HIV/AIDS.  The GVN continued a 
long-standing campaign of anti-drug posters all around 
Vietnam, and Vietnamese television and radio have increased 
the pace and volume of anti-drug and HIV/AIDS warnings 
through a continuing series of advertisements featuring 
popular singers and actors. 
 
¶58.  (U) Vietnam has a network of drug treatment centers 
(refs g and h).  According to MOLISA, with three new 
facilities in Binh Phuoc (2) and Hanoi (1), there are now 74 
centers at the provincial level, and 7,100 treatment 
facilities at lower levels.  The provincial centers have a 
capacity of between 100 to 3,000 addicts each.  Haiphong and 
Son La are now building centers.  In the southern province 
of Ba Ria Vung Tau, the People's Committee is investing VND 
97 billion (USD 6.3 million) in a new treatment center in 
Xuyen Moc District's Hoa Hiep Commune, where 2,000 drug 
addicts, prostitutes, and HIV/AIDS patients will receive 
vocational training.  The center will also house about 478 
family members.  Haiphong organized a ground-breaking 
ceremony for a treatment center in Gia Minh commune, Thuy 
Nguyen district on March 27 .  The center has a total area 
of 103 hectares with a maximum capacity of 1,000 drug 
addicts.  Initial investment is VND 72.48 billion (USD 4.7 
million). 
 
According to MOLISA Vice Minister Dam Huu Trac, Vietnam's 
treatment goals for 2003 include: 
 
--  treatment and post-treatment supervision for 60 percent 
of the registered addicts; 
--  reduction of the relapse rate by 10 percent; 
--  in provinces such as Quang Tri, Quang Binh, Thua Thien 
Hue, Gia Lai, Kon Tum, Quang Nam, Tra Vinh, Phu Yen, Binh 
Dinh, and Binh Thuan (where addiction is not a serious 
problem), treatment of 100 percent of the addicts and a goal 
of no addicts by 2005; 
-- treatment of at least 60 percent of the addicts in other 
provinces; 
--  investment to upgrade and expand existing centers. 
 
¶59. (U) To encourage the treatment effort, Prime Minister 
Khai visited Nhi Xuan Center for Education, Vocational 
Training and Employment (for addicts), in Ho Chi Minh City 
in February.  The Prime Minister spoke highly of the 
achievements by the center and praised the seriousness of 
the staff. 
 
¶60. (U) In an interview by An Ninh Thu Do (Capital Security) 
newspaper, Director of Hanoi Social Evils Prevention Branch 
Nguyen Vi Hung said that there are only six rehabilitation 
centers in Hanoi City, but the municipality plans to build 
more centers to provide treatment to 5,000 drug addicts. 
According to Hung, there are now 12,536 drug addicts in 
Hanoi, of whom 1,500 are in jails, 3,500 are in treatment 
centers, and 7,500 are receiving "community treatment." 
Hung said the city planned to increase the current capacity 
to 8,000 beds by 2006.  In addition, the Hanoi People's 
Committee has decided to build a new drug rehabilitation 
center and expand six others to cope with increasing numbers 
of drug addicts.  The new center will be located at Ba Vi 
district, Ha Tay province. 
 
¶61. (U) Over the past two years, Ho Chi Minh City has 
allocated VND 500 billion  (USD 32.3 million) for its "Three 
Reductions" campaign against drug abuse and trafficking, 
prostitution, and crime.  The city revealed the figure at a 
conference reviewing the program's first two years.  Much of 
the fund was used to build, repair, and/or upgrade 18 
centers for 28,000 drug addicts and sex workers.  Another 
23,000 drug addicts received treatment at home under the 
supervision of local authorities.  According to Tuoi Tre 
(Youth) newspaper, Ho Chi Minh City now has 37,423 addicts, 
an increase of 7,423 over 2002.  Out of that number, 33,577 
are in treatment facilities. 
 
¶62. (U) SODC officials have admitted that the centers are 
often inadequate, and that the high recidivism rate is 
"unacceptable."  Based on a number of visits throughout the 
year, Embassy agrees that drug center conditions range from 
good (in Ho Chi Minh City) to under construction (Lang Son 
province, Can Tho City).  Community-based drug treatment 
outside of centers is spotty; counselors are expected to 
make visits to addicts being treated at home and provide 
advice and some medicines, if needed, but services are 
inconsistent. 
 
¶63. (U) No such escapes from drug treatment centers have 
been officially reported in 2003, unlike in 2002.  However, 
according to a senior MOLISA official, the escape rate for 
2003 was 10 percent.  This problem has occurred mainly in Ho 
Chi Minh City, Hanoi, Yen Bai, and Quang Ninh; 3,300 addicts 
escaped in Ho Chi Minh City alone in 2003. 
 
¶64. (U) During its June 2003 session, the NA approved a five- 
year pilot project on post-treatment vocational training 
developed by the Ho Chi Minh City People's Committee. 
However, Deputy Chair of the NA Legal Commission Nguyen Van 
Thuan pointed out two "problematic" issues related to "legal 
aspects" and "human rights," notably keeping drug users 
beyond the drug law's two-year compulsory treatment, was 
illegal.  According to Nguyen Hoang Mai of the NA's Social 
Affairs Committee, the goal of the program is to try to 
reduce the relapse rate (generally estimated at about 80 
percent for all categories of drugs, similar to western 
countries, with the relapse rate for heroin and other 
narcotics considerably higher) by providing recovering 
addicts with more skills that would enable them to assume 
"productive lives after treatment."  NA Chairman Nguyen Van 
An said that the pilot project, begun on August 1, is being 
implemented in Ho Chi Minh City and other major provinces 
and cities, according to press reports, following the Prime 
Minister's approval.  According to the project document, the 
training and employment of rehabilitated drug addicts will 
be undertaken on "voluntary" basis.  However, those who do 
not volunteer but run high risk of relapse will be compelled 
to stay.  In the third quarter of 2003, Ho Chi Minh City 
sent 400-500 recovering drug addicts to work in the Nhi Xuan 
industrial park.  Between 2003-2005, the city will send 
13,500-16,000 former drug users to the industrial complex 
specifically designed for post-drug rehabilitation. 
 
¶65. (U) Deputy Prime Minister Khiem held a meeting with Ho 
Chi Minh City municipal officials on September 9 to review 
the program.  The municipality reported that 27,898 drug 
addicts had been placed in rehabilitation centers by 
September 5.  Over VND 500 billion was injected to the 
program to construct new buildings and upgrade and expand 18 
rehabilitation centers to accommodate 30,000 drug addicts. 
The design for the industrial parks and "new urban areas" in 
Nhi Xuan, Hoc Mon District and An Nhon Tay, Cu Chi District 
had been completed.  The Nhi Xuan industrial park will 
provide jobs to 12,000 workers, of which 5,000-6,000 will be 
former drug users.  28 enterprises and businesses in Ho Chi 
Minh City have cooperated with 18 rehabilitation centers to 
provide employment opportunities.  20 more enterprises and 
companies have plans to employ post-rehabilitation workers. 
 
¶66. (U) According to MOLISA, the nation's rehabilitation 
center system has undertaken detoxification and 
rehabilitation for 54,760 drug addicts.  Among them, 27,000 
were carried over from year 2002.  Ho Chi Minh City has the 
largest number of participants, with 8,500, followed by 
Hanoi with 3,500.  Despite these efforts, the number of drug 
users receiving treatment remains proportionally small. 
Only 46,723 cases were treated last year, accounting for 
32.9 percent of registered drug users nationwide.  In order 
to overcome this situation, many provinces such as Hanoi, 
Thanh Hoa, Hai Phong, Son La, Ho Chi Minh City, and Ha Tay 
are constructing or expanding their rehabilitation centers. 
The biggest obstacle for rehabilitation is job creation and 
post-rehabilitation monitoring.  In the last 9 months, only 
68 out of 9,068 post-rehab addicts obtained employment. 
 
¶67. (U) According to a senior MOLISA official, Nguyen Minh 
Triet, Secretary of the Ho Chi Minh Municipal Party 
Committee, said publicly that he "could bet his political 
career on the success of the program," but the project has 
not been completely successful. The MOLISA official pointed 
out that keeping the recovering addicts in "employment 
parks" is a way of applying administrative punishments 
through "detention" in a way that fails to ensure the 
detainees' human rights. 
 
¶68. (U) Vocational training in the centers remains uneven, 
ranging from fairly good to nonexistent.  In Yen Bai 
province, there is widespread participation in carpentry, 
tailoring, tree planting, and construction training.  In 
Quang Nam province (central Vietnam), on the other hand, 
there was no training available.  Staff training at the 
centers is generally limited to on-the-job, due to lack of 
resources.  Neither of these problems is likely to be 
resolved in the foreseeable future.  Inadequate funding 
plagues drug treatment centers, similar to many other public 
institutions in Vietnam.  This does not appear to have 
changed during 2003.  On a more positive note, Ho Chi Minh 
City announced in September it would be adding nearly USD 
800,000 to its anti-drug campaign, much of it aimed at drug 
awareness and treatment. 
 
¶69.  (U) HIV/AIDS is a serious and growing problem in 
Vietnam and one that is closely related to intravenous drug 
use.  At least 60-70 percent of known HIV cases are related 
to injection drug use, and in some intravenous drug user 
(IDU) populations the HIV prevalence rate exceeds 80 
percent, according to GVN statistics.  In February, NCADP 
organized a national conference to review HIV/AIDS work in 
¶2002.  Vice President Truong My Hoa and Deputy Prime 
Minister Khiem attended the meeting.  According to reports 
at the conference, HIV/AIDS cases exist in all provinces and 
cities, and at least 61 percent of the carriers are due to 
intravenous drug use.  Vice President Hoa urged the entire 
society to gather strength against the "century epidemic" 
via different programs.  During 2003, Vietnam continued its 
efforts to combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic through the 
following activities: 
 
--  September 3-14, a GVN delegation traveled to the U.S. 
for a study tour to observe HIV prevention programs for 
IDUs, co-sponsored by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) and the Ford Foundation.  The 
delegation, led by MOH Vice Minister Hung, included high 
level officials from the MPS, MOH, and MOJ, who visited 
various HIV prevention programs in New York City (including 
programs for incarcerated populations at Rikers Island); 
community outreach strategies; and drug abuse treatment 
programs including methadone maintenance (Bronx Clinic); 
--  From September 30 to October 2 in Hanoi, Vietnam and the 
U.S. co-organized a major conference on HIV/AIDS prevention. 
The conference was chaired by MOH and supported by the 
CDC/Global AIDS Program (GAP). Participants focused on 
measures to prevent drug addicts from acquiring and 
transmitting HIV/AIDS; 
--  In a meeting with UNDP chief representative Jordan Ryan, 
Deputy Prime Minister Khiem asked the UNDP to help Vietnam 
form an effective HIV/AIDS prevention strategy to fend off 
the rapid spread of the disease.  Khiem stressed that the 
epidemic is one of the most pressing issues facing the 
Government of Vietnam; 
--  During the June Session of NA, Nguyen Thi Hoai Thu, 
Chairperson of the NA's Commission of Social Affairs, called 
for stronger combat against "social evils" (usually drugs, 
prostitution, and trafficking in persons) and HIV/AIDS to 
ensure sustainable development.  Ms. Thu also urged the line 
ministries, particularly MPS and MOLISA, to improve inter- 
ministerial cooperation; 
--  The largest drug treatment center in southern Vietnam -- 
Binh Phuoc Drug Rehabilitation and Vocational Training 
Complex -- opened in May 2003; it plans a 100-bed ward for 
drug addicts infected with HIV/AIDS; 
--  HIV infection among drug users and solutions to curb the 
infection were discussed in the "Scientific-Practical 
Workshop on Drug and Reduction of HIV/AIDS Transmission: 
Situation and Solution" organized by the CPV's Central 
Commission of Ideology and Cultural Affairs on August 20. 
According to the presentation made by MPS representatives, 
the number of registered drug users has increased from 2000 
to the end of June 2003 by 50 percent, from 104,000 to 
153,000; the real number is believed to be even higher. 
Over 70 pct of these are IDUs.  According to national 
"sentinel" surveillance, overall HIV infection in this group 
is 30 percent, with HIV prevalence peaking at up to 80 
percent in some provinces.  At least 60 pct of the 
cumulative 69,000 people with HIV detected in Vietnam thus 
far have a risk factor linked to injection drug use. 
According to a MOLISA report, 90 pct of sex workers in 
rehabilitation centers had used drugs in the past and 20-30 
pct were dependent on drugs.  In the conclusion of the 
workshop, Dr. Dao Duy Quat, the Vice Chairman of the CPV's 
Commission of Ideology and Cultural Affairs, reaffirmed that 
the situation of HIV infection among drug users and the risk 
of transmission to the wider community in Vietnam was 
alarming and that harm reduction is an effective and 
affordable approach.  He also advocated the promotion of 
condom use among high-risk groups to avoid HIV transmission 
to the wider community; 
--  MOH organized a conference on September 26 in Hanoi to 
gather comments on the 5th draft of the national strategy 
for HIV/AIDS control until 2010.  The draft contains an 
exclusive chapter in advocacy for harm reduction including 
high-risk behavior-change communication, needle and syringe 
exchange, and substitution drug treatment.  Vietnam has set 
a target to keep the infection rate under 0.3 per cent; 
--  As of the end of 2003, the GVN estimated that there were 
80,000 people infected with HIV; 11,000 cases of full-blown 
AIDS; and 6,065 deaths from AIDS-related diseases.  Because 
HIV testing in Vietnam is still limited, current numbers of 
HIV infected persons are greatly underestimated.  However, 
based on current figures, the number of HIV-positive people 
in Viet Nam is projected to be 197,581 in 2005 and 350,975 
in 2010.  With support from international donors, MOH is 
currently re-estimating these projections.  The new 
estimates have not yet been released, but unofficial reports 
suggest they will be higher; 
--  In a recent decree, Prime Minister Khai decided to give 
a special allowance to army soldiers and national defense 
officials who manage, educate, care for, or give medical 
check-ups to people with HIV/AIDS.  Soldiers and national 
defense officials infected with HIV/AIDS on the job will get 
check-ups and treatment and enjoy preferential policies as 
"sick soldiers."  Part of the decree specifies that they 
will be recognized as martyrs when they die; 
--  MOH issued a directive on HIV/AIDS prevention during the 
22nd Southeast Asia Games calling for increased 
accessibility to condoms at drug stores, groceries, 
cigarette kiosks, tea stalls, and among peddlers.  More 
syringes were also put on sale at the pharmacies.  IEC 
(INFORMATION - EDUCATION - COMMUNICATION) pamphlets and hand- 
outs carrying messages of HIV prevention in Vietnamese and 
English were widely distributed in public places such as 
hotels, rest houses, playing fields, and bus stops. 
 
¶70.  (U) GVN authorities appear to recognize the problem and 
are cooperating with the USG and other donors.  USAID has a 
USD 4 million HIV/AIDS program, administered through several 
non-governmental organizations.  USAID's funding level will 
rise to USD 6 million in 2004.  However, USAID has also 
recommended that the GVN "dramatically increase its 
commitment to fighting HIV/AIDS," including adopting 
additional national public health policies and a multi- 
sectoral approach. 
 
¶71.  (U)  CDC has a five-year USD 10 million program with 
ongoing HIV/AIDS technical assistance bilateral program 
through CDC/GAP.  According to CDC, during 2003, the GVN 
continued stronger support for HIV prevention programs, 
including voluntary counseling and testing (VCT) and 
community outreach in speeches and media.  Thus far, CDC has 
funded 20 anonymous MOH VCT programs in separate provinces 
over the past 12 months, with plans to expand to 35 
provinces by September 2004.  With these programs, more than 
7,000 persons have already been HIV-tested, of whom 23 
percent are HIV-infected.  CDC/GAP has also supported MOH in 
community outreach programs for IDUs in 15 provinces; in 
these, trained peer educators have made over 9,000 contacts 
with IDUs, providing HIV prevention education and referral 
to VCT or other services.   On the GVN's part, some major 
cities (i.e., Ho Chi Minh City) have established additional 
VCT sites at local levels, and one VCT center supported by 
Family Health International (FHI) recently opened in Hanoi 
at the national Bach Mai hospital. (Note: GVN officials at 
the central and provincial levels take great pains to refer 
to drug addicts and users as well as HIV/AIDS patients as 
"victims" rather than criminals. End Note.) 
 
¶72. (U) Since 1998, USAID funding totaling USD 13 million 
has supported a large-scale prevention, mitigation and care, 
and support-focused HIV/AIDS program, predominantly through 
its Global IMPACT Project, implemented by Family Health 
International.  This program focuses its comprehensive 
interventions in three high-prevalence provinces, targeting 
high-risk groups.  Key partners include MOH, Provincial AIDS 
Committees, as well as CDC.  Additionally, USAID is 
supporting national policy development through the POLICY 
Project, including assistance to the GVN on its National 
HIV/AIDS strategy and its Ordinance review.  USAID programs 
also support advocacy for People Living with HIV/AIDS, a 
study on the impact of stigma and discrimination, and the 
development of Leadership Advisory Groups to raise awareness 
and to reduce stigma and discrimination.  USAID's funding in 
the period 2004-2007 is expected to reach approximately USD 
25 million. 
 
¶73.  (U)  Planned or ongoing GVN actions include: 
 
-- opening 20 VCT sites, with 15 more are anticipated by the 
end of  2004; 
-- three new peer education programs have been initiated, 
13 more were opened during 2003 and five more are 
anticipated by 2004; 
-- two new outpatient clinics for HIV care and treatment 
have been opened for diagnosis and management of 
opportunistic infections; 
-- 31 provinces currently support surveillance sites that 
monitor the spread of HIV/AIDS among a cross-section of the 
population; and, 
-- the GVN is working with the USG and other foreign donors 
in the areas of HIV management and care, diagnosis and 
management of opportunistic infections, and assessing the 
evidence for HIV prevention for injecting drug users.  Also 
included among this action are behavioral surveillance, 
stigma reduction, and policy development and enforcement at 
the central level, as well as capacity building at the 
central and provincial government levels. 
U.S. POLICY INITIATIVES AND PROGRAMS 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶74. (U) In 2003, Vietnam and the U.S. completed and signed a 
bilateral counternarcotics agreement.  The agreement 
included counternarcotics and law enforcement projects 
totaling USD 333,390.  It represents the first direct 
bilateral counternarcotics program assistance to Vietnam. 
The USG currently funds training annually for some GVN law 
enforcement officers and other officials involved in the 
legal arena for courses at the International Law Enforcement 
Academy (ILEA) in Bangkok.  During calendar year 2003, U.S. 
Embassy Hanoi sent 49 law enforcement officers for training 
at the Academy. 
 
¶75.  (U)  The USG also contributes to counternarcotics 
efforts through UNODC.  During 2003, the USG made 
contributions to two projects: "Measures to Prevent and 
Combat Trafficking in Persons in Vietnam," and "Interdiction 
and Seizure Capacity Building with Special Emphasis on ATS 
and Precursors." 
 
Other ongoing UNODC projects: 
 
-- National Drug Control Masterplan (USD 100,000 USG 
contribution; Sweden and Italy are also donors).  This 
ongoing project is intended to assist the NCADP to develop a 
2001-2010 masterplan for controlling drugs.  According to 
SODC, the Plan is now ready for the Prime Minister's 
approval; 
-- Ky Son Phase Two, a socio-economic development project to 
replace opium poppy cultivation. (USD 635,000 USG 
contribution; Germany, Luxemburg, Sweden, and Japan are also 
donors.)  This project began in 2002 and is intended to 
build on the success of Phase One in establishing drug 
demand reduction programs among ethnic minority people in a 
remote area of Nghe An province, adjacent to the Lao border. 
The three project components include community development, 
alternative development, and infrastructure development. 
--  Project Vie/B85 on prevention of drug abuse among ethnic 
minorities in northern Vietnam (Son La, Lai Chau and Lao 
Cai); 
--  Vie/03/G61 on strengthening the existing working models 
and establishing a new innovative partnership with local 
NGOs for community-based prevention of high risk behavior 
related to IDU (coordinated by UNAIDS); 
-- Project R21 on Trafficking in Persons (U.S. is one of the 
donors). 
 
The road ahead 
-------------- 
 
¶76.  (U) The GVN is acutely aware of the threat of drugs and 
Vietnam's increasing domestic drug problem.  However, there 
appears to be continued suspicion of foreign law enforcement 
assistance and/or intervention, especially from the U.S., in 
the counternarcotics arena.  This is one of the factors 
impeding progress in counternarcotics law enforcement. 
During 2003, as in previous years, the GVN made progress 
with ongoing and new initiatives aimed at the law 
enforcement and social problems that stem from the illegal 
drug trade.  Notwithstanding a lack of meaningful 
cooperation with DEA, the GVN continued to show a 
willingness to take unilateral action against drugs and drug 
trafficking.  Vietnam still faces many internal problems 
that make fighting drugs a challenge.  With the conclusion 
of the counternarcotics LOA, the USG can look forward to 
enhanced counternarcotics cooperation, and DEA involvement 
in LOA-related training activities could open the door to 
improved cooperation with that agency. 
 
STATISTICS 
---------- 
 
¶77.  (U) BELOW ARE OFFICIAL 2003 VIETNAM DRUG STATISTICS 
PROVIDED BY THE SODC.  THE FIGURES REPRESENT THE FIRST NINE 
MONTHS OF THE YEAR.  FINAL FIGURES WILL BE SUBMITTED SEPTEL. 
¶78.  (U)  BEGIN TEXT, INCSR SUMMARY TABLES. 
 
SUMMARY TABLES FOR THREE YEARS 
 
-- 1. COCA.  VIETNAM PRODUCED NO COCA IN 2003 OR PREVIOUS 
YEARS. 
 
-- 2. POTENTIAL COCA LEAF.  NOT APPLICABLE TO VIETNAM. 
 
-- 3. OPIUM. 
 
STATISTICAL TABLE 
 
DRUG CULTIVATION (HECTARES)   2003      2002      2001 
 
HARVESTABLE CULTIVATION       94        315       200 
ERADICATION                   94        315       200 
POPPY HARVESTED (SEEDS)        0        0         0 
 
-- 4.  POTENTIAL OPIUM GUM.  NOT AVAILABLE. 
 
-- 5.  CANNABIS.  SODC ADMITS CANNABIS CULTIVATION IN 
VIETNAM'S SOUTHERN PROVINCES OF DONG NAI, AN GIANG, DONG 
THAP. HOWEVER, THE AREA IS RELATIVELY SMALL.  SODC HAS NO 
FIGURE AVAILABLE ON HOW MANY HECTARES OF CANNABIS PLANTS 
WERE UPROOTED IN THESE PROVINCES.  CANNABIS ALSO ENTERS 
VIETNAM FROM CAMBODIA. 
 
-- 6.  POTENTIAL CANNABIS YIELD.  NOT APPLICABLE. 
 
-- 7.  DRUG SEIZURES IN KILOGRAMS: 
 
STATISTICAL TABLE 
 
SEIZURES           2003            2002      2001 
 
¶A. COCA LEAF       N/A        N/A       N/A 
¶B. COCAINE PASTE   N/A        N/A       N/A 
¶C. COCAINE BASE    N/A        N/A       N/A 
¶D. COCAINE HCL     N/A        N/A       N/A 
E/F.OPIUM          254.3      462.62    535.55 
¶G. HEROIN          239.8      53.87     33.35 
¶H. CANNABIS        329.3      234.6     1,281 
¶I. OTHERS, BY UNITS 
(TUBES OF ADDICTIVE DRUGS)         203,647 
(DOSES OF HEROIN)             N/A 
(ATS)                         25,686 
 
 
-- 8.  ILLICIT LABS.  DURING 2003, SODC REPORTED NO LABS 
BEING DESTROYED. 
 
-- 9.  DOMESTIC CONSUMPTION OF ILLICIT DRUGS.  NO AVAILABLE 
STATISTICS. 
 
-- 10.  ARRESTS. 
 
STATISTICAL TABLE 
 
NUMBER OF ARRESTS BY NUMBER OF CASES/NUMBER OF PERSONS 
ARRESTED. 
 
2003            2002               2001 
 
10,000/16,000       11,057/17,873       10,739/18,040 
 
-- 11.  USERS. 
 
STATISTICAL TABLE 
 
NUMBER OF REGISTERED DRUG ADDICTS 
 
2003                2002                2001 
 
152,900             131,000             104,669 
BELLARD