This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/05/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: PARLIAMENT FEELING ITS OATS 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 1350 
     ¶B. ANKARA 808 
 
 
 (C) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reason: 1.5(b)(d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Building on the March 1 defeat of the government 
proposal regarding U.S. and Turkish troop deployments to Iraq 
(reftel), Parliamentary leaders and other influential M.P.s 
are sketching out an ambitious agenda that will, if carried 
out, aggrandize the institution and make it a more permanent, 
and independently powerful, policymaking organ. 
 
 
-- Emin Sirin, Deputy Chairman of the Parliament's Foreign 
Affairs Committee (and a notorious "no" voter on March 1), 
characterized the vote to us on March 4 as marking the rise 
of Parliament and the emergence of an "understanding" with 
the opposition CHP.  As a result, Parliament is preparing 
constitutional amendments that will enhance its ability to 
act more independently of the government. 
 
 
-- Salih Kapusuz, the powerful AK Parliamentary Group Deputy 
Chief, elaborated on March 5 that the constitutional and 
other legal changes now quietly being prepared by AK include 
promoting: 1) greater "real" Parliamentary oversight of GOT 
decisionmaking and areas, such as military budgeting, long 
left relatively free from civilian scrutiny; and 2) greater 
local-level government control of its own activities. 
Kapusuz described the AK vision as one that would help 
transform Parliament into something more along the lines of 
the U.S. Congress in its power to set and control the 
legislative agenda. 
 
 
-- Turhan Comez, AK leader Erdogan's former Chef de Cabinet 
and now an M.P. representing Balikesir, noted to us March 5 
that Parliament has "self-promoted" its role since the Nov. 3 
elections.  He intimated that, given AK's huge majority and 
the fact that there is no national election necessary until 
2007, M.P.s are freer now than ever before to act as they see 
fit.  "The culture of one-man rule over a party is beginning 
to change," Comez added. 
 
 
-- Opposition CHP polling guru and senior M.P. Bulent Tanla 
told us March 5 that "this marked the first time in recent 
memory that discipline in a dominant party had broken down." 
(Fellow CHPer Emin Koc noted that this unravelling was due in 
part to non-party organizations -- the tarikats -- that 
provisionally support AK.)  Years from now, Tanla predicted, 
people will look back on March 1 as "the beginning" of 
Parliament's ascendancy. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) Some legislators are clearly feeling their oats since 
the Parliament's ambitious Speaker, Bulent Arinc, helped 
engineer the failure of the Government's March 1 proposal. 
While that foray in power politics was in part an intramural 
affair aimed at rival elements within the AK Party apparatus, 
it was clearly a watershed in Turkish legislative history. 
Whether this new independent streak can be sustained is an 
open question of considerable significance.  This is so 
particularly given: 1) what we expect will be the eventual 
anti-Arinc counterattack from Erdogan, Gul or both; and 2) 
the almost certain negative reaction (particularly involving 
military budgeting) to such a parliamentary power play by a 
TGS already viscerally opposed to AK and to Arinc. 
PEARSON