This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 002257 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
DS/OP/AF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2013 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV PHUM PINR ECON ASEC ZI ZCTU
SUBJECT: ZCTU LEADERS, DEMONSTRATORS ARRESTED IN ADVANCE OF 
PLANNED MARCH 
 
REF: HARARE 2246 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  On November 18, police arrested 9 members of 
the ZCTU governing body, and about forty-five civil society 
leaders and ZCTU members nationwide in advance of a ZCTU 
planned demonstration.  There were credible reports that WOZA 
Director Jenni Williams was severely beaten during arrest, 
but police presence on the streets of Harare was lighter than 
usual for such an event.  The GOZ appears, as in the past, 
determined to quash any public expression of opposition.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) On November 18, at about 10:30 a.m. riot police 
stormed a demonstration (Ref) planning meeting at the Quality 
International Hotel in Harare of the Zimbabwe Congress of 
Trade Unions (ZCTU) general council.  Of the 
thirty-five-member body, nine were arrested including 
Secretary General Wellington Chibebe, President Lovemore 
 
SIPDIS 
Matongo, Deputy Secretary General Collen Gwiyo, and Secretary 
General of the Progressive Teachers' Union of Zimbabwe (PTUZ) 
Raymond Majongwe.  According to Mlamleli Sibanda, ZCTU 
Information Officer, police did not mistreat any of the 
arrestees. 
 
¶3. (U) On the same day at about 1:00 p.m. police in Harare 
arrested about thirty people who were gathered to participate 
in a ZCTU march against high taxation and deteriorating 
economic conditions.  Among those arrested were John Makumbe, 
Director of Transparency International Zimbabwe (TIZ), Brian 
Raftopolous, Director of the Crisis in Zimbabwe Coalition, 
Lovemore Madhuku, Director of the National Constitutional 
Assembly (NCA), Janah Ncube, Director of the Women in 
Parliament Support Unit (WIPSU), and Mike Davies, Chairman of 
the Combined Harare Residents Association (CHRA).  The 
remaining arrestees were mostly ZCTU members.  Speaking on 
his cell phone from custody at Harare Central Police Station, 
Raftopolous said they had gathered near Town House to begin 
the planned march to the Ministry of Finance.  Immediately as 
they began to march, police arrested them.  Raftopolous said 
police had not mistreated them. 
 
¶4. (C) The sister of Jenni Williams, Director of Women of 
Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA), told the DCM that police arrested 
Williams in Bulawayo and beat her severely.  Williams, 
distraught but able to get a cell phone call out to her 
sister, said several other WOZA members were arrested with 
her as they gathered to march on November 18; some of the 
others were also beaten.  (Note: Attempts to contact Williams 
directly have been futile.  End Note). 
 
¶5. (C) Sibanda said that as workers gathered to march in 
Bulawayo, a police truck arrived and riot police jumped out 
and started beating would-be demonstrators.  The workers 
fled, one person ran into the street, was hit by a passing 
vehicle, and was severely injured. 
 
¶6. (C) Sibanda said that on the morning of November 18, 
police also arrested seven ZCTU members in Gweru, and one 
each in Victoria Falls, Gwanda, and Bulawayo.  Gebre 
Gebremariam, Zimbabwe Representative of the Solidarity Center 
said that the goal was to force police to arrest them as a 
sign of protest, and that now their intention was to get out 
of jail and do the same thing next week. 
 
¶7. (U) On November 17, SAPA carried a statement by COSATU 
supporting the planned ZCTU demonstration and calling on the 
GOZ not to interfere with the ZCTU's bona fide trade union 
activities and to let the workers of Zimbabwe express their 
feelings over economic hardships.  Sibanda said that CTUC and 
ICFTU had also issued statements in solidarity with the 
planned march. 
 
¶8. (C) Emboffs toured around downtown Harare during the time 
when the demonstration was supposed to start and spoke 
directly with several gathered who were later arrested. 
Emboffs observed not more than forty people gathered near 
Town House for the planned march.  Police presence was less 
than for previous similar events.  Groups of three to four 
officers could be seen patrolling near the planned gathering 
area, and in Africa Unity Square, some with batons.  MDC 
Secretary for Economic Affairs Tendayi Biti said that he 
 
SIPDIS 
expected the turnout to be low due to lapses in planning and 
communication. 
COMMENT: 
-------- 
 
¶9. (C) Although the ZCTU had hoped the general populace would 
respond to its call to march, the turnout in Harare at least 
appeared to be largely symbolic.  As usual, police were not 
afraid to preemptively arrest leaders and break-up a very 
modest march in its earliest stage - demonstrating that the 
GOZ has no intention of allowing any public expression of 
opposition. 
SULLIVAN