This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 000810 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/01/2013 
TAGS: CASC ASEC EPET ENRG ECON PINS PGOV NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: NO MILITARY ACTION YET ON OIL RIG HOSTAGE 
CRISIS 
 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 807 
     ¶B. ABUJA 806 
     ¶C. ABUJA 768 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador Howard F. Jeter for reason 
1.5 (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) GON National Security Agency Military Assistant 
Colonel Idris and State Security Service Director General 
Kayode Are both told the Ambassador on May 2 that Nigerian 
naval vessels near the four Transocean Sedco Forex rigs have 
not yet taken any action. He indicated that a contingency 
plan was in place, but that there was no specific deadline 
for involvement of the military. Managing Director of 
Transocean Sedco Forex Ian Clark also confirms May 2 that the 
situation on the rigs is unchanged and there has been no 
military action. Clark  said he had instructed company 
officials in Port Harcourt to contact naval officers in the 
area to obtain assurances that no immediate military action 
is planned. 
 
 
¶2. (C) National Labour Congress President Adams Oshiomole 
told the Ambassador he is hosting negotiations today between 
the national leadership of the National Union of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas Workers (NUPENG), who have condemned the 
hostage taking, and local (Port Harcourt) NUPENG leadership 
who support the action. Oshiomole hopes this meeting will 
produce a negotiated settlement. Clark will also be at the 
venue, but remain outside the meeting for parts of the 
negotiations in order to give Oshiomole a chance to mediate 
directly between the NUPENG members. Oshiomole indicated that 
he remains in frequent contact with President Obasanjo on 
this issue. 
 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador will meet with Ministry of Labor and 
Productivity Permanent Secretary Omotade to discuss a role 
for GON pressure on the labor organizations to resolve the 
crisis quickly and peacefully. Comment: Minister Gwadabe has 
traveled to Kano to campaign for state assembly elections. 
With the Minister out of the loop, we are now less hopeful 
that the Ministry can be an effective agent to pressure the 
trade unions toward a settlement. However, the Ministry's 
interaction may not be as necessary as we thought given NLC 
President Oshiomole's active pressure. We will continue to 
actively engage with union leadership to clearly convey the 
gravity with which the USG views this situation. Meanwhile, 
in our communications with the GON leadership, we continue to 
express our concern that negotiations be given every chance 
to succeed and that military force not be used precipitously 
to resolve the situation. End Comment. 
JETER