This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001970 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR D, SA, SA/INS, EUR/NB, INR/NESA; NSC FOR 
¶E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:    DECL: 11-14-13 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS PTER MOPS PINR CE NO LTTE
SUBJECT:  In meeting with Ambassador, Sri Lankan Chief 
of Defense Staff underscores support for peace process 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1963, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead. 
Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  The Ambassador paid a call November 4 on the 
Chief of Defense Staff (CDS), Lieutenant General Lionel 
Balagalle.  During the hour-long discussion, the 
Ambassador reiterated to LTG Balagalle our happiness 
with the restraint shown by the Sri Lankan military 
during the past twenty months in general and throughout 
the events of the last two weeks in particular.  The 
Ambassador stressed the point that we allowed our 
military-to-military exercises and programs to continue 
last week specifically owing to the responsibility and 
stability shown by the armed forces.  LTG Balagalle 
thanked the Ambassador for the confidence that the U.S. 
places in Sri Lanka and gave his highest assurances that 
the military would go forward with the peace process, 
would uphold the rule of law, and would continue to work 
to build stability in Sri Lanka. 
 
¶2.  (C) In addition to the central themes of military 
professionalism and restraint, LTG Balagalle touched on 
several other themes relevant to the security situation. 
LTG Balagalle stated that the Sri Lankan government and 
military were to a large extent responsible for the 
events leading up to the 1983 riots and subsequent 20 
years of civil war.  LTG Balagalle agreed with the 
Ambassador that the first step to solving a crisis 
situation is to accept responsibility for one's own part 
in its creation.  In this regard, he vowed to continue 
the military's support of the peace process, but thanked 
the U.S. for its efforts in helping the Sri Lankan 
military improve.  The military must be strong, he said, 
to prevent the LTTE from believing it has another option 
than negotiating peace. 
 
¶3.  (C) Interestingly, LTG Balagalle revealed that for 
the past twenty months of serving under a cohabitation 
government, he and the other service commanders as well 
as the Commandant of the Special Task Force and the 
Inspector General of Police have followed a self-imposed 
policy of non-partisan discipline.  He said they had 
agreed not to pass criticisms made by one side to the 
other, not to reveal criticisms to the press, and to 
continue to follow the rule of law.  Balagalle commented 
that if the President had imposed a state of emergency, 
he had told the Services that they would not change 
their behavior and would act as if there were not an 
emergency.  For example, if told to arrest someone, they 
would hand that person unilaterally to the police to be 
handled under the normal justice system. 
 
¶4.  (C) COMMENT:  Balagalle clearly understood the point 
about the need for the armed forces to continue to act 
with restraint while the civilians sort out the 
political process.  His comment on how the military 
would act during an emergency was tantamount to saying 
that he would try to avoid letting the President use the 
military for political purposes.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶5.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD