This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001117 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/16/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL YE
SUBJECT: SALIH EXPRESSES CONDOLENCES FOR RIYADH BOMBINGS 
 
 
Classified By: DCM ALAN MISENHEIMER FOR REASON 1.5 D 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) On May 14, Deputy FM al-Radi called in the DCM to 
deliver a condolence letter from ROYG President Salih to 
President Bush for the 5/13 Riyadh bombings.  The letter 
expresses condolences for the American victims' families, 
condemnation of the terror acts, and Yemen's commitment to 
the war on terrorism. While delivering the letter, al-Radi 
spoke about ROYG-US security cooperation, the US-Saudi 
relationship, and the situation in Iraq since the return of 
Shia leader Mohammed Bakir al-Hakim. 
 
----------------- 
CONDOLENCE LETTER 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (U)  The DCM, accompanied by polecon chief, was convoked 
on 5/14 by Abdullah Ali al-Radi, MFA Deputy Minister for 
Arab, Asian and African Affairs, to receive a condolence 
letter from ROYG President Ali Abdullah Salih to President 
Bush.  The letter (text below in para 7) expresses emphatic 
condemnation of the Riyadh bombings as terror acts 
incompatible with all religious teachings and reaffirms 
Salih's previous pledges of partnership with the US in 
combating terrorism. 
 
¶3. (C)  Al-Radi also expressed his own personal condolences. 
The DCM briefed him on the methodology of the attacks, 
stressing that security practices in Yemen and elsewhere must 
adjust to counter the evolving tactics of the terrorists. 
The DCM took the opportunity to acknowledge the outstanding 
cooperation the Embassy receives from ROYG security forces 
protecting the Embassy, the Hadda compound (predominately 
American and international residents), the Sheraton Hotel, 
which hosts many American visitors, and Embassy residences. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
REGIONAL ISSUES - SAUDI ARABIA AND IRAQ 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Al-Radi was curious about US-Saudi relations in the 
aftermath of the attacks, given the tensions existing since 
9/11. The DCM assured him that friendship and cooperation 
between Saudi Arabia and the US have stood the test of many 
years. 
 
¶5. (C) Turning to Iraq, Al Radi asked for an update on the 
security situation, especially since the return of Shia 
leader Mohammed Bakir al-Hakim from Iran.  Will the US be 
able to prevent a three-part ethnic breakup of the country? 
The Coalition's prompt establishment of three administrative 
divisions had provoked much speculation among Yemenis, he 
said. The DCM reminded him of the U.S. Administration's firm 
commitment to the territorial integrity of Iraq and 
underscored U.S. determination to restore essential services 
and help the Iraqi people build a better future. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (C) Al Radi stretched the delivery of the condolence 
letter into an hour's conversation on current events.  His 
questions on Iraq's potential problems with Shia separatism 
and Saudi Arabia's current unenviable position may have been 
posed with the imminent arrival of Iranian President Khatami 
in mind. Khatami's official visit began today, 5/15. 
 
------------------------------- 
TEXT OF SALIH CONDOLENCE LETTER 
-------------------------------- 
 
Dear friend Mr. President George W. Bush, 
President of the United States of America, Washington 
 
I was greatly moved and felt deep sorrow to receive the news 
that a number of American citizens had fallen victim to the 
distressing terrorist attack targeting several residential 
compounds in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 
 
As we express to you our emphatic condemnation of this 
shameful terrorist act, I offer my sincere sympathy for the 
victims who fell as a result of it and convey our deepest 
condolences to the families of the victims and to the 
friendly American people. 
 
Such terrorist acts, which are incompatible with all 
religious teachings and proper humanitarian values, can only 
heighten the determination of the international community to 
move forward and redouble its efforts to combat and eradicate 
terrorism and prevent the loss of innocent souls.  We affirm 
to you that the Republic of Yemen, which rejects terrorism in 
all its forms and aspects and from whatever source, will 
remain an effective partner to your friendly country and to 
the international community in combating terrorism and 
confronting its perpetrators. 
Please accept my highest regards. 
 
Signed: 
Ali Abdullah Saleh 
President of the Republic of Yemen 
 
Sana,a 
Rabi,e Awal 13, 1424 
May 14, 2003 
HULL