This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 003043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT:  KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION SPECIAL, JULY 8-9: NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS IN KUWAIT. 
 
SUMMARY: Opinion in Kuwait's media on how to characterize 
the results of the parliamentary elections remains divided. 
Some liberal commentators believe that Islamists now have 
the upper hand, a notion that the bulk of editorial opinion 
(and most post media contacts) dismiss as a fundamental 
misreading of the situation. All newspapers prominently 
report Islamist appeals for unity in the new Assembly and 
the reported formation by the Islamist bloc of a wider 
"conservative block" with non-Islamist MPs. 
 
Most papers report growing anticipation that de-facto head 
of government Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad will be tapped by the 
Amir on July 11 to be the new prime minister, replacing 
ailing Crown Prince Sheikh Saad. Several commentators say 
that effective government headed by a strong prime minister 
is needed to overcome what one terms "the state of 
confusion, stagnation and slump suffered by Kuwait over the 
past few years." 
 
Allegations of vote buying appear in several editorials, 
along with criticism of Kuwait's democracy as 
"unrepresentative." END SUMMARY. 
 
¶1.   News Stories:  All newspapers continue to analyze and 
interpret the election results. Defeated incumbent and 
liberal Ahmed Al-Rubie refutes claims that the new assembly 
is an "Islamic parliament," while defeated incumbent and 
Islamist, Mubarak Al-Duwaila, denies that the new assembly 
is pro-government. Al-Seeyasah reports on July 8 that 
Kuwaitis have rejected the Islamist movements and "defeated 
their plan of Islamization of Kuwait." 
 
In the July 8 edition of Al-Seyassah, editor-in-chief Ahmed 
Al-Jarallah stated that interpreting the election results as 
a victory for "radical extremists," as he says was reported 
in the foreign media, is "entirely incorrect." Al-Jarallah 
describes the Islamists in the new parliament as "moderate," 
and posing no threat to U.S.-Kuwait relations. 
 
Conservative Salafi MP, Dr. Waleed Al-Tabtabie stated that 
the Islamic block had improved its position with the 
elections because most of its new MPs are independent 
Islamists rather than associated with one of the two main 
Islamist movements (the Salafis and the Islamic 
Constitutional Movement) which will make it easy for them 
cooperate with MPs of other political groups. 
 
On July 8, the spokesman of the Islamist Salafi movement, 
Turki Al-Zafiri, warned against disunity among Islamists in 
the National Assembly, and called on coordination between 
Islamists to confront the pro-government block in the 
assembly, Al-Rai Al-Aam reports. 
 
Al-Watan reports that Islamic block members agreed on July 8 
to open membership to non-Islamists, thereby creating a 
"conservative block." 
 
Most papers predict that the Amiri decree commissioning the 
formation of the new government will be issued either on 
July 9 or 11. Editor-in-chief of Al-Qabas, Waleed Al-Nesf, 
called on the Kuwaiti leadership to make decisive decisions 
without delay, saying, "those who call for more time before 
making a decision are also calling for more disunion and 
separation." 
 
Most newspapers interpret the meeting of Acting Prime 
Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed on July 8 with former 
ministers and MPs as a sign that Sheikh Sabah will be 
commissioned to form the new government. Speculation 
continues over whether he will do so in his capacity as 
Acting Prime Minister or as Prime Minister, the position 
nominally held by Crown Prince Sheikh Saad. Al-Qabas and Al- 
Seyassa learned from informed sources that four former 
speakers of parliament advised the Amir to separate the 
posts of Crown Prince and Prime Minister. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports the composition of the new Council of 
Ministers will include four returning ministers from the 
royal family and four other ministers that held portfolios 
in the last government. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Confusion Bred By An Assembly Lacking Vision" 
Liberal Salwa Al-Saeed wrote in independent Al-Seyassah 
(7/8):  "An analysis of the results of the election 
indicates that the many unresolved issues in parliament will 
remain unresolved, and that the parliament will hinder 
progress on many issues related to the changes occurring in 
the region. A specific example is an [Islamic Constitutional 
Movement] MP who incited people against reform polices by 
arguing that the 2003 National Assembly would focus on 
granting women political rights, exploiting oil fields, 
normalizing relations with Israel and waging war against 
Islamists under the pretext of fighting terrorism. A 
National Assembly with such MPs would undoubtedly sacrifice 
national interests for their own individual interests and 
lead Kuwait to turn against the current of change in the 
world and into direct confrontation with its allies." 
 
¶4.  "Where Does Reform Begin?" 
Prominent liberal lawyer Hassan Al-Essa wrote in independent 
Al-Qabas (7/8): "This National Assembly will be worse than 
its predecessor. This Assembly perpetuates the priority 
given to tribal affiliations over national loyalties.  The 
Kuwaiti people have not grasped the changes that have 
occurred, and will still occur, in the region. The American 
Ambassador's message on the Fourth of July fell on deaf 
ears. It is not true that youths voted for change. Instead, 
they voted for backwardness and tradition. The youths voted 
as if they were the elderly when they voted for conservatism 
and extremist forces representing Bin Laden's comrades and 
his sympathizers. It was not only the liberals who lost 
during the elections, but also the moderate Islamists." 
 
¶5.  "The Complexity of the Islamic Movements in Kuwait" 
Pro-Islamist Dr. Haifa Al-Sanousi wrote in independent Al- 
Rai Al-Aam (7/8): "The Islamic movements are too busy 
fighting amongst themselves, and this is weakening their 
collective efforts to unite and protect Sharia law. There is 
no doubt that we are in need of a serious initiative that 
seeks to unify all Islamic movements and to coordinate on 
issues pertaining to the Quran. Regrettably, the Islamic 
movements lack harmony due to contrasting ideologies. The 
unintentional blend of the concepts of religion and politics 
may inadvertently sanction some liberals to circulate their 
own sick theories." 
 
¶6.  "The Knights" 
Liberal Bader Sultan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (7/8): "Those who did not vote for [prominent 
liberal incumbent] MP Al-Neibari will soon realize that they 
have relinquished Kuwait's national interests in return for 
a hearty meal or promises of a job. With the defeat of [five 
leading liberal] candidates. democracy has lost strong men 
who stood up against administrative and financial 
corruption. [T]hey were disposed of in a way that appeared 
to be democratic, but in reality was closer to bribery and 
vote-buying." 
 
¶7.  "Virtues of Democracy" 
Saleh Al-Shayji wrote in independent Al-Anba (7/8): "We have 
heard and seen for ourselves how the `democrats' enslaved 
their followers and electorates. Some of them bought off 
their followers with their own money, and in some cases, 
used money from other sources. In this light. [democracy] is 
a game of frivolity, which enslaves the free. and brings to 
power people who do not deserve the right to be the masters 
of the nation." 
 
¶8.  "To the New Prime Minister, With Regards" 
Liberal former MP Ahmed Al-Rubei wrote in independent Al- 
Qabas (7/8): "An Amiri decree will be issued in the next few 
days commissioning a new Prime Minister. Our hope is that he 
would be a genuine leader for the Ministers. We also hope to 
see an end to the role of 'acting' Prime Minister, something 
which has exhausted the political process." 
 
¶9.  "The Prime Minister in Charge" 
Liberal former Secretary General of the Kuwait Democratic 
Forum, Ahmed Al-Dayeen, wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(7/8): "If the new Prime Minister has serious intentions to 
implement reforms, and a real ambition to avoid the state of 
confusion, stagnation and slump suffered by Kuwait over the 
past few years, then he must seek to establish a coherent 
ministerial group and not a mix of discordant elements." 
 
¶10.  "Is This the Will of the Nation?" 
Dr. Yaser Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (7/8): 
"The National Assembly represents only thirteen percent of 
all Kuwaitis. The National Assembly is comprised of some 
deputies who support the will of those in power, and were 
imposed on the assembly just to receive illegal benefits 
from the system. In addition, one third of the National 
Assembly is comprised of ministers who are forced to vote in 
support of government decisions. Can we still consider the 
Kuwaiti National Assembly a representative of the people's 
will and a true determiner of this country?" 
 
 
JONES