This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 000808 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS USTR FOR NED SAUMS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ETRD JO WTRO
SUBJECT: JORDAN INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND METROLOGY LOOKS 
TO IMPROVE, HARMONIZE NATIONAL STANDARDS 
 
REF: 02 RIYADH 8282 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (sbu) SUMMARY: The Jordan Institute of Standards and 
Metrology (JISM) has been working hard since its creation 
in 1995 to develop comprehensive product standards that 
conform with international norms and support Jordan's WTO 
commitments.  At the same time, JISM is currently 
evaluating offers to implement an International Product 
Conformity Certification Program and perform pre-shipment 
inspections, a program designed to cover gaps in Jordan's 
current standards regime. We have raised USG concerns about 
such a program, and JISM has expressed a willingness to 
cooperate with us to address USG concerns.  Since JISM will 
be a key player in developing GOJ positions in the WTO on 
standards issues, a strong relationship with JISM will help 
cement GOJ support for USG proposals in relevant WTO 
committees, and will help encourage them to take a 
leadership role among developing country WTO members on 
standards issues.  End summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
JISM STRUCTURE, RESPONSIBILITIES 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (u)  The Jordan Institute of Standards and Metrology 
(JISM) is a quasi-governmental institution established in 
¶1995.  It replaced the Jordanian Directorate of Standards 
(JDS) which was founded in 1972. JISM is financially and 
administratively autonomous.  It is governed according to 
Jordan's Standards and Metrology Law number 22 of the year 
¶2000. The Minister of Industry and Trade chairs JISM's 
Board of Directors, which consists of 15 appointed members, 
including 10 members from the GOJ and 5 members who are 
appointed by private sector bodies (Royal Scientific 
Society, Federation of Jordanian Chambers of Commerce, a 
representative of Jordan's Chambers of Industry appointed 
by the Minister of Industry and Trade, National Consumer 
Protection Society, and Jordan Society for Quality). 
Appointments are for a two-year term, renewable once. 
 
¶3. (u)  JISM's main objectives are to harmonize Jordan's 
standards with international norms in accordance with WTO 
commitments and to ensure equal treatment for all imports 
with regards to standards issues. Under this umbrella, JISM 
focuses on protecting Health, Safety and Environment; 
Enhancing competitiveness; and coordinating Jordan's role 
in the TBT Agreement.  Health, Safety and Environmental 
standards are obligatory, while standards relating to 
JISM's other priorities are considered voluntary. 
 
¶4. (u)  JISM has six primary functions: issuance of 
standards; inspection of imports and domestically produced 
goods; accreditation of labs and inspection bodies; 
certification of products and issuance of the Jordan 
Quality Mark in accordance to a benchmark combining the ISO 
9000 and Jordan's standards; establishment of the National 
Metrology Scheme; and creation of an information center. 
 
¶5. (u)  JISM has 24 permanent technical committees that 
draft standards at the request of JISM.  The drafting 
process goes through several stages of review, where all 
stakeholders, including the private sector, have a chance 
to express their opinions on proposals for new standards or 
amendment of existing standards. Standards are implemented 
once JISM's Board of Directors approves them. JISM can 
adopt international standards or those of other countries 
and implement them in Jordan if it is deemed that they meet 
Jordan's requirements.  For example, Jordan uses American 
standards for the steel and construction industry, the 
Codex Alimentarius for the food industry, and ISO for 
systems. 
 
-------------------------------- 
PRE-IMPORT CERTIFICATION PROGRAM 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (sbu)  JISM is currently evaluating offers from various 
consultants and organizations to implement an International 
Product Conformity Certification Program and perform pre- 
shipment inspections on goods exported to Jordan (reftel). 
Dr. Ahmed Thouqan Al-Hindawi, JISM's Director General, told 
us that a final decision to adopt the program has already 
been taken in principle but that a provider has not yet 
been chosen due to the large number of proposals received 
by interested service providers. Emboffs noted in a meeting 
with Hindawi on January 22 that the USG had some concerns 
about whether or not such a system would be compliant with 
WTO rules.  Hindawi said he feels there is still time to 
comment on the program and indicated JISM's willingness to 
cooperate with the U.S. on this issue. He also gave us a 
copy of the programs instructions (forwarded to NEA/ARN and 
USTR via pouch). 
 
¶7. (sbu)  Hindawi noted that the program is designed to 
cover a gap in Jordan's standards regime, where a main 
challenge is the lack of qualified inspection labs for many 
imported goods (he mentioned specifically new and used 
autos, auto parts, tires, and children's toys).  Hindawi 
conceded that Saudi Arabia is shifting away from its 
similar program. Nevertheless, he said he feels the Saudis 
have benefited from its implementation in the past, where 
it complemented the lack of suitable inspection facilities. 
He noted that Saudi Arabia is now self sufficient in that 
area and can afford to replace pre-shipment inspection with 
local inspection as a result of investing heavily in the 
creation of new testing facilities (investments that, he 
hinted, Jordan could not afford). 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Ministry of Health Holding-off on its Own System 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8. (sbu)  Jordan's Ministry of Health planned to implement 
its own requirement of legalizing export documents of food 
related items by the Jordanian Embassy at the source 
country. The Ministry originally targeted September 1, 2002 
for this requirement to go into effect; the new requirement 
was briefly enforced from January 1, 2003. This had delayed 
at least one US product, a shipment of Fruit Granulated 
Sugar from the US company Savannah Foods Industrial to the 
Jordanian company United Confectionery. According to Dr. 
Ahmed Barmawi, Director of Safety and Health at the 
Ministry, the new requirement is on hold until JISM 
finalizes its program by March of this year. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. (sbu)  As Jordan's authority on product standards and on 
SPS and TBT issues, JISM will be a key player in 
implementation of the kingdom's WTO commitments, as well as 
development of GOJ positions in the WTO on future standards 
issues. As we continue to work with Jordan to take up a 
leadership role among the developing world in the WTO, a 
strong relationship with JISM will help us to coordinate 
our approaches on future SPS and TBT issues.  Dr. Hindawi 
has expressed a strong desire to develop relationships with 
U.S. standards organizations like NIST, ASTI, and the CPSC 
to enable JISM to adopt standards as close as possible to 
American norms wherever feasible.  Hindawi stated in 
particular that JISM had worked with the AMIR program in 
the past, and he expressed JISM's interest in continuing 
that relationship.  The Embassy and AID mission will follow 
up on Hindawi's request. 
GNEHM