This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 001616 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
COMMERCE FOR ITA JEAN KELLY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV BM
SUBJECT: SPDC MUM ON SUCCESSFUL THAI "ROAD MAP" FORUM 
 
REF: A. TOKYO 8048 
     ¶B. RANGOON 1057 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: CDA a.i. Ron McMullen for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) A multilateral meeting on Burma, held December 15th in 
Bangkok, appears to have been a political victory for Burma's 
ruling regime.  Readouts of the meeting from Tokyo (ref A), 
Washington, and Bangkok indicate that there were some tough 
questions put to the Burmese representative, Foreign Minister 
Win Aung, but that the event was largely stage-managed to 
ensure maximum comfort for the Burmese representative.  For 
instance, supposedly all invitations to the event were first 
submitted to the Burmese government for veto.  By all 
accounts, FM Win Aung was able to blow off the tough 
questions but was given full rein to blow smoke on the 
country's "uniquely" troubled history, the status of Aung San 
Suu Kyi's (ASSK) detention and her participation in the 
pending National Constitutional Convention, and to "explain" 
Prime Minister General Khin Nyunt's 7-step "road map to 
democracy" (explored in detail in ref B). 
 
¶2. (C) Intentionally or not, this event will likely prove to 
be another shoulder chuck to the Burmese junta in its 
surprisingly successful campaign to bolster its international 
relations in the wake of its attack on ASSK in late May and 
the imposition of new U.S. sanctions in July and August.  The 
GOB's success winning over its neighbors and, eventually, 
ASEAN are well documented.  However, the attendance at the 
event of several non-Asian countries that have been critical 
of the regime's human rights abuses will give new confidence 
to the regime that it now has international, not just ASEAN, 
"understanding" ("support" is a luxury, not a necessity) to 
pursue the PM's "road map" at its own pace, in its own way, 
without undue pressure from abroad.  The GOB noted in a 
December 17 "information" sheet, responding to public U.S. 
skepticism of the "road map" process, that "Support for the 
National Convention is strong in Myanmar, in the region, and 
even among groups which have long been opposed to the current 
government." 
 
¶3. (C) Other than this retort, there has been no announcement 
or briefing by the Burmese government on the Thai forum's 
outcome.  More surprisingly, there have been no propaganda 
pieces yet in the government's mouthpiece "The New Light of 
Myanmar," though the December 18 edition of the 
semi-independent "Myanmar Times" included an article and 
photo from the Bangkok meeting.  In contrast, there was 
significant coverage in the "New Light" of PM Khin Nyunt's 
visit to Japan for the Japan-ASEAN summit meeting on December 
11-12, including several reprints of a smiley Khin Nyunt 
shaking hands with Japanese PM Koizumi. 
McMullen