This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 001329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/03/2013 
TAGS: PINR PGOV PREL KDEM NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF MEMBERS OF THE 
NEW CABINET PART 1 
 
 CLASSIFIED BY CHARGE DAWN M. LIBERI; REASON: 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
 
¶1. (C) On 18 July, President Obasanjo swore in 38 of 40 new 
Ministers and deputies and confirmed their various 
portfolios.  In a novel twist, Obasanjo had forwarded the 
roster to the National Assembly without matching the 
prospective Ministers to any portfolios.  He only designated 
the portfolios after the nominees had been confirmed.  The 
Assembly approved all but one candidate, while Obasanjo 
removed another from consideration.  Below are biographical 
sketches of 11 ministers.  Bios on the remainder will be 
transmitted septel.  Additionally, analysis of the selections 
and of the unorthodox nomination process will also be treated 
septel. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Ministry of Internal Affairs - Minister, Dr. Iyorchia 
Ayu, was the former Minister of Industry (1999-2000), as well 
as a former Minister of Education (1993-1995).  Ayu was 
elected Senator in 1992 and was the Senate President until 
November 1993 when impeached by pro-Interim National 
Government Senators led by Chuba Okadigbo (most recently 
Buhari,s ANPP running mate).  He was a member of the 
now-defunct Social Democratic Party.  Prior to his political 
roles, Ayu was a sociology professor for 24 years and an 
editor at the Daily Times of Nigeria for 2 years.  Ayu is in 
his mid-fifties and was influential in the PDP,s victories 
in Benue State in the April elections.  He is the nominee of 
PDP Chairman Audu Ogbeh and Benue State Governor David Akume. 
 Minister of State Abubakar Tanko was the Director of Yankari 
National Park in Bauchi State, and is a longtime stalwart in 
the PDP in Niger State. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Ministry of Foreign Affairs - Minister Olu Adeniji was 
Ambassador to France (1987), Switzerland (1977-1981) and 
Australia (1976-1977), UN Special Representative and Head of 
the UN Mission to Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and Special 
Representative for the UN Mission in the Central African 
Republic (MINURCA).  He has also served in the Nigerian 
Embassies in Washington, Freetown, Sierra Leone, and Accra. 
He was a career diplomat for 31 years, retiring in 1992 after 
serving as the Director-General of the MFA.  He is 69.  He is 
from Ogun State and has a close relationship with Obasanjo. 
Minister of State Saidu Balarabe Sambawa is a Hausa/Fulani 
from Kebbi who was a failed PDP candidate for Governor in the 
April elections.  He is a former banker and farmer and is 
known as a grassroots politician in the state.  He has raised 
cash and food crops, along with ostrich farming, and has 
worked in the banking industry for many years, rising to the 
post of Deputy Director of Inland Bank (where he is a major 
shareholder).  He is in his forties. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ministry of Justice - Minister and Attorney General 
Chief Akinlolu Olujinmi is a practicing Senior Advocate of 
Nigeria (the highest professional ranking for an attorney) 
and is well known within the PDP of Oyo State.  He is a 
Yoruba who has held no previous political office. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Ministry of Information - Minister Chukweumeka Chikelu 
was a Representative from Anambra State in the National 
Assembly who was reelected in April.  In the House he headed 
the Committee on Cooperation and Integration.  He is an Igbo 
in his mid-thirties and his father was a Minister of 
Management Services under General Ibrahim Babangida,s regime. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Ministry of Women and Youth Affairs - Minister Rita 
Akpan was the Secretary to Akwa-Ibom Governor Victor Attah. 
She is a single mother.  Minister of State Princess Funke 
Adedoyin is the daughter of Kwara State business mogul Chief 
Samuel Adedoyin.  She has held no office, but has very close 
personal ties to the Sarakis of Kwara State and Vice 
President Atiku. (NOTE: There are widespread rumors of an 
actual affair between Adedoyin and the Vice President.  This 
nomination is compensation from Governor Bukola Saraki for 
not being chosen as his Deputy. END NOTE) 
 
 
¶7. (C) Ministry of Defense - Minister Dr. Rabiu Musa 
Kwankwaso is the former governor of Kano who lost in April. 
In his mid-forties, Kwankwaso,s experience is in water 
resources, having worked in the sector for 17 years.  He 
started in politics as a State Representative in 1992, and 
was a delegate to the 1994-1995 Constitutional Conference. 
He was a member of the now-defunct Social Democratic Party. 
Following Abacha,s death, he joined the PDP and won the 
party,s nomination for governor over a former supervisor. 
Kwankwaso has no known background in military affairs but is 
regarded by President Obasanjo as a capable administrator who 
will help him control the Ministry.  Obasanjo probably wanted 
to give this relatively young, strong political ally a 
prominent position so that he can remain in the public eye. 
Minister of State Dr. Rowland Oritsejafor, an Itsekiri, was 
the Deputy National Secretary of the PDP.  He is a medical 
doctor and has close ties with Delta State Governor Ibori. 
Also with no background in military affairs, his nomination 
appears to be more a political than substantive consideration. 
¶8. (C) Ministry of Intergovernmental and Special Duties - 
Minister Frank Nweke was Chief of Staff to Enugu Governor Dr. 
Nnamani.  His father is a prominent businessman in the North. 
 Nweke has a degree in Public Administration and at 34 is the 
youngest person in the cabinet.  His nomination is solely on 
the recommendation of Governor Nnamani. 
 
 
¶9. (C) Ministry of Cooperation and Integration - Minister 
Lawan Gana Guba was a Senator from Yobe State. 
 
 
¶10. (C) Ministry of Police Affairs - Minister Broderick 
Bozimo, an Ijaw, was a lawyer and politician in Delta State. 
He and his wife are very close to Governor James Ibori and 
his wife was recently named Chief Judge of the state.  He is 
a prominent Ijaw personality and his law firm is based in 
Warri. 
 
 
¶11. (C) Ministry of the Federal Capital Territory - Minister 
Ahmad Nasir El-Rufai was the Secretary of the National 
Council on Privatization and the Director-General of the 
Bureau for Public Enterprises (BPE) from 1999 to 2003. 
El-Rufai is from Kaduna and is in his mid-forties.  He 
attended Harvard Business School.  He has worked in various 
fields in the private sector, mainly in surveying, and his 
first public sector experience was with a think tank in the 
Presidency, the Program Implementation Monitoring Committee 
(1998-1999).  He is considered to be one of Nigeria,s ablest 
technocrats. 
 
 
¶12. (C) Ministry of Sports - The new Minister is Colonel Musa 
Mohammed of Gombe State. 
LIBERI