This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ISTANBUL 001759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL GOVERNOR COMMENTS ON TERRORIST ATTACKS 
 
REF: A. ISTANBUL 1703 
     ¶B. ISTANBUL 1711 
     ¶C. ISTANBUL 1744 
     ¶D. ISTANBUL 1752 
 
 
Classified By: Consul General David Arnett for reasons 1.5 (b & d) 
 
 
¶1. (U) After examining sites of the November 15 and 20 terrorist 
attacks, the Ambassador visited the Istanbul Mayor and Governor on 
November 24 to extend the condolences of the United States and to offer 
 
 
any further assistance that might be required during the investigations 
 
 
Istanbul Governor Muammer Guler, who supervises all of the Istanbul 
police and security services, offered the following comments on the 
terrorist attacks and the ongoing investigations. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) "We Must Remain Strong": Guler noted that Istanbul had been 
both physically and psychologically unprepared for the attacks. 
Additionally, following the November 15 attacks on the synagogues, law 
enforcement authorities were more focused on the investigation than on 
preventing further attacks. Despite the shock, however, Guler echoed 
Prime Minister Erdogan's remarks by saying that as the investigation 
continues, Turkey must remain strong and continue to preserve its 
democracy, respect for human rights, and ongoing European Union reforms 
 
 
After all, Guler said, "This is what the terrorists were targeting." 
 
 
¶3. (C) An International Struggle: Sharing views on Al-Qaeda and its 
methods, Guler stressed the importance of international cooperation in 
meeting this threat.  He thanked the Ambassador for U.S. assistance, 
noting that there has already been excellent cooperation and exchange o 
 
 
intelligence.  The Governor detailed some of the additional security 
measures that have been taken since the attacks, particularly to protec 
 
 
such public sites as airports, bridges, and shopping malls, in addition 
 
 
to sites that might be associated with those countries supporting the 
U.S. in its Coalition of the Willing (e.g., Italy, Bulgaria, Japan).  H 
 
 
admitted that closing off public streets is not always possible, but 
that the police are looking for the right balance between security and 
other concerns. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Investigations Continue: Guler told the Ambassador that the 
police have already gathered good evidence from the November 15 
bombings.  Echoing his Police Chief's public criticism of the local 
press, the Governor suggested that the failure to respect the 
sensitivity of the investigative process (i.e., the publication of the 
names of suspects and accomplices) may have hindered the ability of the 
 
 
police to prevent the second bombings.  Without providing specific 
details, Guler implied that there are "signs" that there may be further 
 
 
attacks. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Ambassador noted that the defender's resources are finite 
and the terrorist's targets nearly endless, but he offered several 
suggestions that the Governor absorbed with keen interest.  The 
Ambassador pointed out that the color-coded threat alert system in the 
U.S. had drawn criticism but that it had also applied real pressure on 
terrorist planners.  Similarly, he said, although it may be impossible 
to close off more than a few streets in a metropolis like Istanbul, 
random vehicle checks along streets with potential target buildings 
would complicate and perhaps negate attack plans. 
 
 
¶6. (U)  The Ambassador also suggested that the Governor might meet with 
top security officials from New York City, including former Mayor 
Guiliani, in order to benefit from their experience in dealing with the 
 
 
aftermath of terrorist attacks and preventing future attacks.  [Note: 
NYC Mayor Bloomberg and Istanbul Mayor Gurtuna have already exchanged 
visits. Istanbul's U.S. Sister City is Houston, but the Department's 
Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs is looking into the 
possibility of formalizing another Sister City relationship 
between NYC and Istanbul.  Mission will pursue this proposal. 
 
 
ARNETT