This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 COLOMBO 001953 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (CAMP, DEAN, WALLER); SA/PD (REINCKENS, SCENSNY, 
STRYKER); SSA/PAS 
 
E.O.12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT: MEDIA PLAY: THE LATEST ON SRI LANKA'S POLITICAL 
CRISIS 
 
¶1. Summary.  The Sri Lankan English and vernacular media's 
intense scrutiny of the political stand-off between the 
Prime Minister and the President continued.   The Prime 
Minister's decision to meet with the President dominated 
the headlines in all languages.  The reaction of political 
players in Sri Lanka - from the Buddhist clergy to Muslim 
and Tamil political parties - was self-interested. 
Meanwhile, English and Tamil dailies fretted about donor 
aid and the stock market's decline. Commentary on the 
continuing political crisis was extensive.  Government- 
owned newspapers boldly supported the President and her 
proposals on their editorial pages.  Commenting on 
terrorism in Sri Lanka, one independent English editor 
wrote, "much more resolute commitment by foreign powers is 
called for...."  Tamil commentators were worried about the 
fate of peace talks with the LTTE, especially with the 
President leading them, as well as the stability of the 
government.  One Tamil daily wondered, "Will this lead to 
war again?"  Sinhala commentary focused more on the fate of 
a national alliance for the government.  End summary. 
 
----- 
Headlines 
----- 
¶2.  The Sri Lankan English and vernacular media's intense 
scrutiny of the political stand-off between the Prime 
Minister and the President continued.  Independent Sinhala 
daily, LAKBIMA's headline (11/11), "President invites PM 
for discussions," was echoed by many other newspapers and 
television newscasts.  Independent English DAILY MIRROR 
reported (11/11), "130 MPs request Speaker to recall 
Parliament immediately," while pro-LTTE Tamil daily, SUDAR 
OLI's coverage was more conspiratorial (11/11), "Secret 
talks with 7 MPs by PA to form government." 
¶3.  Reaction to this news was predictably split. 
Independent English daily, ISLAND carried the Sinhala 
nationalist flag with its headline (11/11), "Bhikku Front 
lauds takeover of ministries," while pro-LTTE website 
TAMILNET chastised (11/11), "SL President's lack of 
sincerity will hamper peace efforts - TNA."  Independent 
English DAILY MIRROR carried the Prime Minister's message 
(11/11), "Govt. - LTTE peace talks put off." 
¶4.  The Prime Minister's decision to meet with the 
President dominated the headlines in all languages. 
Independent Sinhala daily, DIVAINA  reported the basics 
(11/12), "Chandrika -Ranil discuss today."  Meanwhile, 
independent English DAILY MIRROR gave more of the story 
(11/12), "UNF flatly rejects national govt., but PM will 
meet President today to discuss crisis on peace process," 
and added another dimension to the parliamentary showdown, 
"Huge bribes allegedly offered [to MPs]."  Government owned 
Tamil daily, THINAKARAN countered (11/12),  "Only President 
has the power to convene the parliament - MLA Hisbullah 
MP." 
¶5.  The reaction of political players in Sri Lanka -  from 
the Buddhist clergy to Muslim and Tamil political parties - 
was self-interested.  Government-owned English DAILY NEWS' 
headline focused on the President's proposed national 
alliance (11/12),  "Buddhist clergy praises President's 
decision," while independent English daily, ISLAND reported 
Muslim leader Rauf Hakeem's comments (11/12), "SLMC will do 
its best to solve CBK-UNP Govt. crisis - Rauff ."  Pro-LTTE 
website TAMILNET sagely observed (11/12), "More 
constitutional snags hit Sri Lanka's crisis,"  but 
independent Maharaja Television's English newscasts (11/12) 
reported Tamil National Alliance (TNA) comments that, 
"Because the President did not honor previous MOUs, only 
the Prime Minister can negotiate for peace with the Tamil 
Tigers."  Independent Tamil daily, VIRAKESARI added 
(11/12), "Defense Ministry under the President, an obstacle 
to peace talks - TNA informs Norwegian delegation." 
¶6.  Meanwhile, English and Tamil dailies fretted about 
donor aid and the stock market's decline.  Independent 
Tamil daily, THINAKKURAL reported (11/11), "Danger of 
foreign aid being delayed."  Independent English daily, 
ISLAND mourned (11/12), "Bourse loses more ground with no 
positive political news," while independent English DAILY 
MIRROR reported, "Stock market plunges further." 
----- 
Editorials 
----- 
¶7.  Commentary on the continuing political crisis was 
extensive.  Government-owned newspapers boldly supported 
the President and her proposals on their editorial pages. 
Commenting on terrorism in Sri Lanka, one independent 
English editor wrote, "much more resolute commitment by 
foreign powers is called for...."  Tamil commentators were 
worried about the fate of peace talks with the LTTE, 
especially with the President leading them, as well as the 
stability of the government.  One Tamil daily wondered, 
"Will this lead to war again?"  Sinhala commentary focused 
more on the fate of a national alliance for the government. 
 
 ----- Under the headline, "The essentials of national 
reconciliation," government-owned English DAILY NEWS 
commented (11/12), "So, while we wish the new, "grand 
alliance" initiative all the success, it would be relevant 
to remember that it would need to operate within a 
conceptual framework which would make peace possible on a 
power sharing basis." 
 
Block quotes: 
..The concept of what is popularly termed "a national 
government" is likely to earn more backers, particularly 
among Sri Lanka's minority communities...In our thinking, 
such a solution could be predicated - among other principal 
factors - on a power sharing arrangement between the Centre 
and the Regions. These could be considered the basic 
essentials of bringing peace. 
However, the still-born year 2000 draft constitution, 
essentially envisages the evolution of the Sri Lankan State 
along power-sharing principles which take it far beyond our 
controversy-ridden Provincial Councils scheme. In this 
draft is encapsulated the concept of a Union of Regions 
which would have served as a sound basis for negotiations 
with the LTTE... So, while we wish the new, "grand 
alliance" initiative all the success, it would be relevant 
to remember that it would need to operate within a 
conceptual framework which would make peace possible on a 
power sharing basis. If not reconciliation would be a pipe 
dream. 
End block quotes. 
 
-----Under the headline, "Election gives no answer to the 
problem," government-owned Sinhala daily, DINAMINA 
editorialized about elections and warned (11/12), "The 
government will not be able to escape the curse of the 
people who would suffer the extensive damage caused by 
[them]." 
 
Block quotes. 
.The recent statement of Cabinet spokesperson on the need 
for an election is quite confusing. The current crisis has 
two alternatives- a snap election or a coalition 
government. A national government as proposed by the 
President would give a broader and stronger approach to 
peace negotiations while an election would not give any 
party a 2/3 majority and would take the political crisis 
further.  The government will not be able to escape the 
curse of the people who would suffer the extensive damage 
caused by [them]. 
End block quotes. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Befuddled and bamboozled," 
independent English daily, ISLAND  commented (11/11), 
"Foreign involvement in the resolution of our terrorist 
problem is welcome and has helped to a certain degree. But 
the problem remains and if it is to be resolved a much more 
resolute commitment by the foreign powers is called for." 
Block quotes. 
Political analysts are now suggesting greater involvement 
of foreign powers in the resolution of our problem. 
Certainly foreign powers have played a great role in 
getting the 'Peace Process' going. The international 
political climate against terrorism of all forms resulted 
in pressure being built up against the LTTE to such a 
degree that it alone made them sue for peace. 
A greater role for India in bringing about a solution has 
been suggested, particularly in view of the decision to 
sign a defence agreement. There are also roles which 
western powers, particularly the United States can play. 
But if terrorism is to be eradicated from this island- the 
basic solution to our problem-- much more active roles than 
mere diplomatic support for 'a united and democratic Sri 
Lanka' will have to come into play. Mere talk of ' 
unfurling of a security umbrella' becomes meaningless 
unless there is a deep commitment to eliminate the basic 
security threat to the nation. 
Foreign involvement in the resolution of our terrorist 
problem is welcome and has helped to a certain degree. But 
the problem remains and if it is to be resolved a much more 
resolute commitment by the foreign powers is called for. 
Diplomatic efforts alone will not help...However, the 
problem right now is the Ranil- Chandrika confrontation 
which has left the country paralysed... The people right 
now are befuddled and bamboozled. 
End block quotes. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Will peace last?"  pro-LTTE 
Tamil daily, SUDAR OLI commented (11/11), "Since the LTTE 
had undergone bitter experiences with the PA and the 
President earlier, it is very unlikely that they will come 
for peace talks..." 
 
Block quotes: 
Since the LTTE had undergone bitter experiences with the PA 
and the President earlier, it is very unlikely that they 
will come for peace talks with PA VIPs such as Lakshman 
Kadiragamar and Anura Bandaranaike.  They will wait with 
patience... In another fortnight the LTTE Heroes' Day will 
be celebrated and we can know on that day the LTTE's stance 
on the political crisis that has taken 
place in the South. 
End block quotes. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Problems and efforts for 
solutions," independent Tamil daily, VIRAKESARI observed 
(11/12), "Peace talks are not a threat to the country. But, 
if there are no peace talks there is a threat to the 
country,  eventually leading to the division of the 
country." 
 
Block quotes. 
"All countries facing civil war are today trying to rebuild 
their economies . The UNF government has accepted that the 
proposals put forward by LTTE have basic differences, but 
could be sorted out during talks and should not take hasty 
decisions that could affect the peace process..The 
President's action of taking over three ministries has put 
the future of peace talks in question. 
 
Peace talks are not a threat to the country. But, if there 
are no peace talks there is a threat to the country, 
eventually leading to the division of the country. 
End block quotes. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Conspiracy to topple the 
government," independent Tamil daily, THINAKKURAL asked 
(11/12)  if the President's actions, "Will ...lead to war 
again?" 
 
Block quotes. 
...Because of President's actions, a political crisis has 
emerged, the peace efforts have been disturbed, and the 
country's economy shows a downtrend.  The crash of the 
stock market and cancellation of reservations by tourists 
are clear evidence.  In the meantime the international 
community, which had pledged financial support, is losing 
faith. .Prorogation of the parliament is a step towards the 
toppling of the government.  Opposition efforts to buy the 
government members at any cost is the order of the day. 
Will this lead to war again? 
End block quotes. 
 
----- Under the headline, "A political matrimony must take 
place," independent Sinhala daily, DIVAINA commented 
(11/11), "It is the duty of the Government at this moment 
to hand over state security to her, and proceed with the 
peace process.   If Sri Lanka's destiny demands a united 
Sri Lanka then there should be a political matrimony 
between the Prime Minister and the President." 
 
Block quotes. 
We do not understand how the take over of the Ministries 
which were neglected would become a stumbling block to the 
peace process.  It is not realistic for the Government to 
suddenly hand over the responsibilities of the peace 
process to the President. 
 
It is our opinion, if the Government hands over the peace 
process to the President at this juncture, when she is not 
expecting it, then it is to embarrass her that they are 
trying to do so...It is the duty of the Government at this 
moment to hand over state security to her, and proceed with 
the peace process.   If Sri Lanka's destiny demands a 
united Sri Lanka then there should be a political matrimony 
between the Prime Minister and the President. 
End block quotes.  LUNSTEAD