This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KATHMANDU 001744 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS AND DS/IP/SA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC CASC MOPS NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  MAOIST BOMBS IN THE CAPITAL; BATTLES IN 
WESTERN DISTRICTS 
 
REF: KATHMANDU 1740 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  One person was killed and twelve injured 
after Maoist insurgents set off a series of six bomb blasts 
in Kathmandu and its environs on the morning of September 8. 
The explosions are believed intended to intimidate the 
general population into observing a general strike, or 
"bandh," called by the Maoists for September 18.  At least 50 
insurgents and four Royal Nepal Army (RNA) soldiers have been 
killed in fighting in the western districts of Achham, 
Parbat, and Rolpa, according to the RNA spokesman.  The 
Embassy's Emergency Action Committee will meet on September 9 
to assess again the security  situation. 
 
¶2.  (U)  On the morning of September 8, Maoist insurgents set 
off a series of improvised explosive devices in six different 
locations in Kathmandu and its environs.  Each of the 
explosions took place at or near a local government office. 
In all, twelve people were injured and one--a 10-year-old 
student walking to school--was killed when a bomb exploded 
near the Central Bank and Prime Minister's Residence in 
Baluwatar in Kathmandu.  The IEDs (pressure cookers with a 
timing device) were likely set off to publicize--and to 
intimidate the general population into observing--the 
upcoming general strike, or "bandh," called by the Maoists 
for September 18. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The Embassy activated its warden network to alert 
the American community to the explosions (Reftel) and has 
convened an Emergency Action Committee meeting for September 
¶9. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Maoist insurgents have also engaged the Royal Nepal 
Army (RNA) in three different locations in the western and 
mid-western districts of Achham, Parbat, and Rolpa September 
7-8.  At least two soldiers have been reported killed in 
Achham and two in Rolpa.  RNA spokesman Col. Deepak Gurung 
estimated that at least 50 Maoists had been killed in the 
engagements. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Comment:  September 18 will mark the first strike 
called by the Maoists since they unilaterally broke off the 
ceasefire and resumed hostilities against the Government of 
Nepal on August 27.  The coordinated series of bomb attacks 
follows a well-established Maoist practice of preceding their 
strikes with a campaign of urban terror to intimidate the 
general public and thus ensure compliance with the strike. 
We can expect more such attacks, unfortunately, in the days 
to come.  While we have no evidence that the Maoists will 
attempt to target American citizens in this campaign, we will 
continue to monitor the situation closely. 
MALINOWSKI