This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

241740Z Apr 03C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002666 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S HEADSCARF ISSUE OPENS ANOTHER POLITICAL 
RIFT 
 
 
(U) Classified by Acting DCM Frank Ward. Reason: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The Islamist headscarf remains a threatening 
symbol for the Kemalist state. In inviting headscarved women 
to a reception in honor of the children's holiday, AK Party 
Speaker of Parliament Arinc has widened a rift between the 
GOT and the Turkish Establishment.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc hosted an April 23 
reception in honor of Turkey's national children's holiday. 
For the first time in 83 years, the President, TGS chief, 
opposition party members and other high-ranking bureaucrats 
all boycotted the event, ostensibly because Arinc's 
headscarved wife's name appeared on the original invitation 
as a co-host.  Air Force commander Asparuk asked reporters 
rhetorically before the reception, "does this (the 
invitation) mean that we will have to bring our wives covered 
from head to toe?  Of course I am not going." 
 
 
¶3. (U) In the event, Arinc's wife -- and most of the 
headscarved wives of senior AK officials including P.M. 
Erdogan -- did not attend (note: there were 5-10 headscarved 
wives in attendance. end note.).  Pouring gas on the fire, 
however, Arinc and Erdogan took turns lambasting those who 
did not attend.  Calling them "irresponsible," Arinc said 
that those "attempting to cast a shadow on the holiday have 
failed;" Erdogan went further, saying "our country will not 
forgive them." 
 
 
------------------------ 
Arinc, the Lightning Rod 
------------------------ 
 
 
¶4. (C) Even as he touts his role as an above-the-fray figure, 
Arinc has repeatedly used his somewhat insulated position to 
appeal to the hearts and minds of AK grassroots and to 
challenge the status quo.  Whether Arinc hopes to use the 
Speakership as a springboard to a higher office like P.M. or 
President remains an open question.  In this case, although 
Arinc announced his wife would not attend the function, he 
did so mere hours before it began -- pointedly after it was 
clear that the generals and others were not going to attend. 
Moreover, in a speech at a symposium on constitutional law 
this week, Arinc suggested that "positive norms such as 
fairness are more important than constitutional law." 
Arinc's statement no doubt received kudos from AK supporters 
clamoring for fundamental changes to the constitution.  At 
the same time, however, it was a clear challenge to the more 
Establishment-minded officials in attendance, who hold the 
document to be sacred. 
 
 
--------------------------- 
Comment: Escalating tension 
--------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) This most recent incident occurred against the 
backdrop of a series of GOT policies that have raised the 
hackles of a Turkish secular Establishment worried about the 
influence of "political Islam" in State organs.  Press 
reports this week have focused on AK's efforts to place its 
supporters in the highest levels of the bureaucracy -- a 
traditional Turkish political practice.  Media outlets have 
also highlighted a foreign ministry circular, which 
reportedly requires Turkish embassies abroad to reach out to 
the heretofore taboo Islamist foundation Milli Gorus 
(National View) and Fetullah Gulen's Nur movement.  All eyes 
will now be on the April 30 NSC meeting, which will discuss 
acording to the press, "government practices and appointments 
of new bureaucrats" -- but which could also be the first real 
showdown between the two camps since Erdogan became P.M. 
PEARSON