This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000573 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/21/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: TFIZ01: SANAA SITREP ON VIOLENT ANTI-WAR 
DEMONSTRATION 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  A violent demonstration that left 
several demonstrators dead and injured near the Embassy has 
dissipated and is over as of 1800 local time.  Embassy 
reacted the Marine Security Guard and other measures in 
response and informed the Embassy and American community of 
the situation.  ROYG security response was strong, including 
more than 2000 military and police forces, including three 
tanks, demonstrating the government's commitment to 
protecting Americans.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Demonstration Ended;  Situation Under Control 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  The demonstration that turned violent near the 
Embassy has dissipated and is over as of 1800 local. 
Demonstrators clashed with security forces at Sheraton Circle 
(about 1/4 mile from Embassy).  Numbers were estimated at 
5-7,000 demonstrators.  Security forces used tear gas and 
shots in the air to attempt dispersal.  Embassy personnel at 
the Sheraton reported witnessing shots being fired into the 
crowd, and RSO received reports from our Local Guard Force 
(LGF) that some demonstrators had weapons. Several 
demonstrators have been reportedly killed and several police 
injured.  MFA informed DCM that more than 2000 military and 
police forces were deployed to respond to protect the 
Embassy. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  A group of demonstrators gathered in Tahrir 
Square near the center of Sanaa after Friday prayers (approx. 
1230) and moved through the city past the Sheraton Hotel to 
the intersection near the Sheraton (home of many Embassy 
TDYers). 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Yemeni security, including busloads of riot 
police and water cannon, stopped the demonstrators from 
coming closer to the Embassy.  Embassy received notice of a 
petition, and the DCM prepared to go out and receive it.  Per 
Embassy policy, three petitioners are allowed to come to give 
the petition.  However, the demonstrators could not decide 
which three should go and the Embassy refused to allow more. 
At that time, the crowd became unruly and began to throw 
stones.  Yemeni security reacted by firing tear gas and shots 
in the air. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  Several hundred demonstrators attempted to circle 
around the Embassy but were met by security forces firing in 
the air.  They were unable to approach the entrance. 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  At this time, reports are that there are at least 
four demonstrators killed, many injured and nine police 
injured (mostly from stones).  Al Jazeera reported six 
demonstrators killed at 1700 local time. 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  RSO was informed by Yemeni security that an Amcit 
journalist near the demonstration has been detained at a safe 
location for his safety. 
 
---------------- 
Embassy Response 
---------------- 
 
¶8.  (S/NF)  Embassy reacted the Marine Security Guards and 
advised the numerous personnel at the Embassy for StandFast 
to remain indoors to avoid any stray bullets coming down. 
RSO activated Embassy assets, including Force Protection 
Detachment and SOC-Yemen, to provide additional protection. 
 
¶9.  (S/NF)  Warden Messages have been issued to Embassy 
community to inform them of the demonstration and the 
recommend they continue to stay put.  Several radio 
announcements were made by RSO to inform Embassy personnel at 
their residences and at the ACC to continue StandFast. 
 
¶10.  (S/NF)  Ambassador called a meeting at 1430 local to 
discuss internal defense measures at the Embassy and other 
issues.  Recommendations discussed include: 
 
-- a 24/7 watch being instituted from the Embassy roof. 
-- LGF roving patrols continuing around the perimeter. 
 
-- Ensuring strong command and control structures under the 
COM of all Embassy elements. 
 
-- Rules of Engagement regarding response should an 
intruder(s) attempt to scale the perimeter walls, including 
use of tear gas, the use of lethal force if entry to the 
Chancery or Residence is attempted and procedures for LGF and 
RSO response. 
 
-- DCM to ensure that Sheraton security is strengthened even 
further, with the possibility of pulling Embassy personnel 
there into the Embassy if necessary. 
 
(S/NF)  The 24th Marine Expeditionary Force called to give 
their current position off Djibouti and to inform that they 
can be available for rescue within 12 to 24 hours should the 
situation warrant a forced evacuation. 
 
------------- 
ROYG Response 
------------- 
 
¶11.  (S/NF)  DCM received phone calls from the MFA protocol 
director providing assurances to the Embassy that the ROYG is 
responding strongly to the situation.  He told the DCM that 
more than 2000 military and police forces were deployed and 
that the forces were expected to continue keeping the 
demonstrators away from the Embassy.  He said the ROYG has a 
"total commitment" to protect the Embassy and other 
diplomatic missions.  He added that this commitment extended 
to Embassy residences and the Sheraton Hotel, where he 
realizes many Americans stay. 
 
¶12.  (S/NF)  Ambassador took a call from the Presidency 
giving reassurance that they will take all "necessary 
measures" to protect the Embassy. 
 
--------------- 
Press Reporting 
--------------- 
 
¶13.  (U)  Television and wire services have been reporting 
the demonstrations since 1500 local time.  Al-Jazeera reports 
that six people have been killed in fierce clashes between 
police and demonstrators near the Embassy. Wire services (AFP 
and Reuters) have reported that tens of thousands of 
demonstrators chanted "Death to America." and that one 
policeman and three protesters were killed.   Yemeni 
television and radio has not reported any news of the 
demonstrations.  However, the English language newspaper the 
Yemen Times has been running wire reports of the 
demonstrations on its website.  PD has been fielding calls 
from press about the situation and is drafting press 
guidance. 
HULL