This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HO CHI MINH CITY 000426 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PGOV ECON VM ETMIN HUMANR RELFREE
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S VISIT TO VINH LONG 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: On May 5, 2003, Ambassador Burghardt, DPO, and Conoff 
traveled to Vinh Long province in the Mekong Delta with Catholic 
Relief Services (CRS) Country Representative Chris Gilson.  The 
Ambassador met with representatives of the provincial People's 
Committee and Union of Friendship Organizations (UFO) before 
visiting two villages where CRS is building new homes for flood 
victims.  Religious leaders have been allowed to play a small role 
in the project, which is an encouraging signal about the 
government's attitude.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. Arriving in Vinh Long, the Ambassador noted that it had not 
changed much since his last visit to the province 30 years ago. 
Although Vinh Long is the second largest exporter of rice in 
Vietnam (with the U.S. and Iraq as major clients), it remains one 
of the poorest provinces in the country and has an annual GDP per 
capita of $330 USD.  The majority of people live in rural areas 
and rely on agriculture as their main source of income.  The 
province illustrates the relatively slow rate of development and 
lack of infrastructure in the delta region, which suffers 
regularly from flooding during the annual rainy season. 
 
¶3. The Ambassador visited two villages where CRS is building 
elevated houses for flood victims.  The average income falls below 
$175 USD in these villages, which are inhabited by people of Khmer 
origin.  Villagers gave the Ambassador a warm welcome and appeared 
quite happy with their new homes.  Gilson expressed satisfaction 
with the success of the project and said that by the end of 2003, 
CRS will have built over 1,100 houses in Vinh Long.  CRS began 
working in the province after the flooding in 2000 and has used 
this project to build a better relationship with the Vietnamese 
government in the south where its activities are more restricted 
than in the northern region of the country.  CRS hopes it has 
established valuable contacts that will lead to future cooperation 
on more extensive projects. 
 
¶4. Phan Van Dau, First Vice Chairman of the Vinh Long People's 
Committee, emphasized the poverty in the province and expressed 
gratitude for the CRS projects.  He said he wanted to expand 
cooperation with CRS and other American NGOs.  Noting that there 
had been bitter fighting in the area during the war, Dau said the 
province understood it was time to look to the future and develop 
good relations with the U.S.  A businessman who previously worked 
for a State Owned Enterprise in the rice trade, Dau said the 
province was interested in working with the Consulate to attract 
American companies.  The Ambassador encouraged him to reach out to 
overseas Vietnamese as an investment source.  Dau noted that Vinh 
Long is located on the regular tourist track of the Mekong Delta 
but that the number of tourists in the province has decreased 20 
to 30 percent as a result of the SARS epidemic. 
 
¶5. During the trip, the Ambassador had an interesting discussion 
with Tran Van Khai, Vice Chairman of the Vinh Long Union of 
Friendship Organizations, about Decree No. 7 issued at the Ninth 
Party Congress on the relationship between the government and 
religious groups and minorities.  Khai was preparing to take part 
in meetings that are being held throughout Vietnam to educate 
cadre about the decree so they can make sure it is implemented in 
their localities.  Khai claimed that this decree was a 
confirmation of the GVN's liberalization toward religious groups. 
He emphasized that the Communist party needed to utilize the 
strengths of religious organizations and encourage their 
participation in government.  The CPV needs new membership and 
cannot afford to exclude religious groups, he added. 
 
¶6. Gilson said he has noticed the government's changing attitude 
toward religious groups through his work in Vinh Long.  Each 
village holds popular assemblies to select the families who will 
receive CRS houses.  Religious leaders, including Catholic clergy, 
take part in these meetings and their advice about their parish 
members is often followed.  According to both Gilson and Khai, 
neither the government nor the party has a role in the decision- 
making process.  Gilson also said this is the first time CRS has 
had the church as a partner on a project in Vietnam and that local 
government officials have been comfortable with this relationship 
thus far. 
 
¶7. COMMENT: Despite Khai's claim, it is still unclear how the GOV 
intends to implement Decree No. 7 on religion and minorities, 
which has both positive and potentially restrictive elements. 
Vinh Long leadership, at least, appears to be taking some steps in 
the right direction by allowing CRS to partner with a Catholic 
church.  Although Vinh Long officials appear eager for additional 
humanitarian assistance from the U.S., some of the other delta 
provincial leaders are reportedly less forthcoming in their 
dealings with both religious groups and NGOs.  END COMMENT. 
 
YAMAUCHI