This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 001565 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS 
LONDON FOR POL - GURNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/17/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PINS NP GON
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  GOVERNMENT-MAOIST NEGOTIATIONS GENERATE 
FRICTION, BUT CONTINUE 
 
REF: A. KATHMANDU 1559 
     ¶B. KATHMANDU 1552 
 
Classified By: DCM ROBERT K. BOGGS.  REASON:  1.5 (B,D). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (C) The Government of Nepal (GON) and Maoist insurgents 
opened the third round of negotiations in the southwestern 
city of Nepalgunj on August 17.  The GON team presented a 
package of proposed political reforms that include two of the 
three main Maoist demands.  Speaking to the press after the 
first session on August 17, Maoist negotiator Baburam 
Bhattarai denounced the GON package, which proposed an 
all-party committee to amend the existing Constitution, 
rather than an assembly to draft a new one, as inadequate. 
The Maoist also blasted the GON bid to place disarming of the 
insurgents on the agenda for future negotiations.  Despite 
Bhattarai's discouraging pronouncement, negotiators met for a 
second session on August 18 in the southwestern district of 
Dang.  At this point, it is difficult to determine if 
Bhattarai's categorically negative reaction is mere theatrics 
or accurately reflects the Maoist position.  If the latter, 
there seems little hope that the Maoists will remain engaged 
in negotiations that they perceive offer no immediate avenue 
to their true objective--power.  The GON proposals will 
intensify pressure on the Maoists either to embark on serious 
discussions of political reform or to break off talks and 
resume violence.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
ROUND 3 OPENS IN NEPALGUNJ; 
TO BE CONTINUED IN DANG 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Government of Nepal (GON) and Maoist negotiators met 
for a long-delayed third round of talks in the southwestern 
city of Nepalgunj on August 17.  Following the session, which 
lasted until mid-afternoon, GON lead negotiator Finance 
Minister Dr. Prakash Chandra Lohani, accompanied by his 
Maoist counterpart Dr. Baburam Bhattarai, briefed the press 
on their respective views on the discussion.  Lohani 
announced that the GON side had presented the Maoists with a 
number of political reforms, which Bhattarai, in turn, 
lambasted as "ridiculous" and "disappointing" because they 
did not include the controversial demand for a constituent 
assembly.  Bhattarai also said that the Maoists "totally 
disagreed" with the GON's refusal to shift control of the 
Royal Nepal Army from the Palace to "the people."  This 
vituperation notwithstanding, the two team leaders announced 
that negotiations would continue for the second consecutive 
day in the southwestern district of Dang.  The second session 
in Dang reportedly began mid-day on August 18. 
 
--------------------------------- 
GON PROPOSES SIGNIFICANT REFORMS 
THROUGH CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  As promised (Ref B), on August 17 the GON provided 
the Embassy with a copy of the political reforms package 
presented to the Maoists in Nepalgunj.  (A summary of the 
proposals has been faxed to SA/INS.)  The document listed as 
its non-negotiable "bottom line" the constitutional monarchy, 
multi-party democracy, and the sovereignty of the people.  It 
suggested a five-step process toward reform:  a) Maoists and 
GON reach consensus on needed reforms through negotiation; b) 
other parties are brought into the process by an all-party 
round-table conference; c) an interim caretaker government, 
with Maoist participation, is formed to oversee national 
elections; d) elections are held; and e) the newly elected 
Parliament amends the Constitution in line with the "national 
consensus" developed through the four preceding steps.  The 
document tacitly rejects the Maoist demand for a constituent 
assembly to draft a new Constitution by stating that 
previously submitted Maoist proposals "seem to be achievable 
through amending" the Constitution.  The monarchy must be 
retained as "a symbol of Nepalese nationality and national 
unity" that brings together Nepalis of "various languages, 
religions, ethnic groups and cultures." 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  The document also contains several significant 
proposals to address social inequities in the political 
system.  For example, the package suggests changing the 
structure of the Upper House of Parliament, the National 
Assembly, to include "the representation of ethnic groups, 
indigenous peoples and Dalits in proportion to their 
population," while reserving 25 percent of seats in both 
nationally and locally elected bodies for women.  Perhaps 
most surprising, the proposals suggest a quota system for 
ethnic minorities, members of the lower castes, and women 
"for a certain period of time" in government, the 
administrative services, and other professions like health 
and education.    Other proposed changes include greater 
authority for local bodies, a program of land reform, 
stronger constitutional guarantees for freedom of religion 
and expression, a commitment to respect human rights "even in 
difficult circumstances," and introduction of a system of 
proportional representation.  Besides political reforms, the 
document also proposes the inclusion of a few key items on 
the agenda for upcoming negotiations, e.g.,  disarming of 
Maoist cadres and reconstruction of infrastructure damaged 
during the insurgency.  Finally, the document calls on both 
sides to commit to maintaining the ceasefire. 
 
 
-------- 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  The GON proposals seem to us a realistic starting 
point for dialogue regarding useful socio-economic reforms to 
benefit the very sectors of society the Maoists claim to 
champion.  Sadly, Bhattarai's harsh rejection of the GON 
proposals confirms what we have suspected all along--that the 
Maoists are interested not in true reform but in the power 
they believe they can achieve by manipulating a narrowly 
based constituent assembly.  The Maoists have never displayed 
much relish for real negotiations that involve compromise and 
concession, viewing the discussions instead as a vehicle to 
publicize their own demands and maintain, through repeated 
threats of a walk-out, the upper hand.  The GON's unequivocal 
position on its red lines--the constitutional monarchy and 
multi-party democracy--has now left the Maoists little scope 
for such posturing.  The next few days will heighten pressure 
on the rebels either to begin serious talks on an ambitious 
program of political reform or to return to terrorist 
violence. 
MALINOWSKI