This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000482 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR L/LEI, S/CT 
DOJ FOR DAAG BRUCE SWARTZ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/11/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL ASEC PGOV KJUS YM TERFIN
SUBJECT: FM QIRBI ON THE ARREST OF SHEIKH MOAYED 
 
REF: A. BERLIN 406 
     ¶B. SANAA 127 
     ¶C. BERLIN 131 
     ¶D. SECSTATE 7011 
 
Classified By: Edmund J. Hull, Ambassador for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  On Monday 3/10 DCM provided Foreign 
Minister al-Qirbi with a redacted copy of the U.S. complaint 
against Sheikh al-Moayed and a non-paper highlighting the 
most compelling arguments.  Qirbi commented on "USG 
misconceptions" regarding Moayed's involvement with Hamas and 
his financial transactions with a mosque in New York.  Qirbi 
also offered future ROYG assistance to clarify these and 
future "areas of confusion" concerning this case.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  DCM Misenheimer met with Foreign Minister Abu Bakr 
al-Qirbi on March 10 and discussed the arrest of Sheikh 
Mohammed Ali al-Moayed (other topics reported septels). 
(Ambassador was traveling in Aden).  To facilitate ROYG 
access to relevant public documents, DCM presented Qirbi with 
a redacted copy of the United States District Court Eastern 
District of New York's complaint in support of the U.S. 
request for Moayed's extradition.  DCM cautioned that many 
have been surprised by the strength of this indictment, 
particularly the evidence of al-Qaida links, and noted that 
the Germans may reach a decision on the extradition of 
Mohammed Mohsen Yahya Zayed, Moayed's Assistant, later this 
week, and on the extradition of Moayed himself at the end of 
March. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Qirbi provided additional information on two issues 
ROYG considers fundamental to the U.S. case against Sheikh 
Moayed:  Moayed's receipt of funds from a mosque in New York 
and his involvement with Hamas.  Qirbi noted that the funds 
Moayed received from the mosque in New York were intended to 
assist him in his charity work in Yemen.  Qirbi then 
explained that in Yemen contributions to individuals and 
organizations supporting the people of Palestine, including 
Hamas, are not illegal, and Moayed should therefore be judged 
based on Yemeni, not U.S., law.  Qirbi also said that 
numerous officials, perhaps including Moayed, met with Hamas 
Undersecretary Khalid Mashal during his last trip to Yemen. 
Any such meeting was not evidence of a terrorist connection, 
argued Qirbi -- particularly since Yemeni meetings with 
Mashal were focused on convincing him to support the Middle 
East peace process.  Qirbi reiterated that ROYG and USG 
should work together to look at these issues in more detail, 
and volunteered the assistance of the Political Security 
Organization in this endeavor. 
 
¶4.  (C)  DCM acknowledged U.S. and Yemen disagreement on the 
designation of certain terrorist organizations, but, in light 
of the mutual designation of al-Qaeda as an illegal terrorist 
group, suggested that any future U.S.-Yemen cooperation on 
this case might focus on evidence of Moayed's dealings with 
al-Qaeda.  Qirbi nodded affirmatively but did not pursue the 
point. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Comment:  Since DOJ's March 5 press conference 
announcing the release of the complaint, media coverage of 
al-Moayed's arrest and public opposition have reappeared 
after a hiatus of several weeks.  The March 8 Yemeni Observer 
quoted a Yemeni official attesting to Moayed's innocence 
saying, "It is illogical that a Yemeni with $20 million would 
hand it over to Osama bin Laden."  This official has been 
identified by a reliable embassy source as Mohammed Sudam, 
President Saleh's interpreter and a BBC correspondent, and 
his comment is thus likely to reflect President Saleh's 
personal opinion.  Al-Sahwa Net, a publication of the 
Islamist opposition party Islah, also reported that on 
Sunday, March 9 more than a thousand men from the Khawlan 
tribe participated in a sit-in in front of the Presidential 
Palace demanding President Saleh's intervention to seek the 
release of al-Moayed. 
 
HULL