This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 005734 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL KMPI KPAO ECON KU
SUBJECT: KUWAIT:  COMMENTS ON MEPI FY 2003 FUNDING 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 337476 
 
     ¶B. KUWAIT 2949 
     ¶C. KUWAIT 5373 
     ¶D. KUWAIT 5370 
 
¶1.  (U) Embassy Kuwait welcomes the outline of FY 2003 
funding recommendations for MEPI programs (Ref A), and seeks 
inclusion in a number of those programs.  Comments on each 
pillar are given below. 
 
¶2. (U) ECONOMIC PILLAR.  Post will actively promote any MEPI 
projects to reduce trade barriers between Kuwait and the US, 
and among Middle Eastern nations.  Kuwait will be signing a 
TIFA with the US in 2004, and the Government of Kuwait (GOK) 
is eager to receive technical assistance on trade issues. 
The GOK hopes to send representatives to participate in the 
MEPI-sponsored GCC trade compliance workshops to be held in 
2004, as well as to the US Patent and Trademark Office's 
Intellectual Property Rights Muscat seminar scheduled for 
January 2004.  It is likely that the GOK would be willing to 
share costs of future technical assistance programs.  In 
December, the Kuwaitis received the interagency banking 
supervision team that traveled to the region as part of the 
Partnership for Financial Excellence.  While the Kuwaitis 
expressed an interest in sending their banking supervisors to 
receive on-the-job training in more advanced economies, it 
was also apparent that Kuwaiti banking supervisors have 
skills that could benefit less developed economies in the 
region through a similar regional exchange.  Post would also 
welcome the chance for Kuwaiti business executives and 
managers to participate in the Middle East Entrepreneur 
Training program.  Such a program would help to strengthen 
Kuwait's private sector and advance one of Embassy Kuwait's 
Economic Pillar goals:  reducing the role of government in 
the economy (Ref B). 
 
¶3.  (U) POLITICAL PILLAR.  Post has a strong interest in 
participating in the regional parliamentary strengthening 
program.  Kuwait's National Assembly could benefit from 
institutional development support, training and exchanges. 
We believe there is strong local interest in initiatives to 
strengthen the institutional capacity, research and 
information technology capabilities of the National 
Assembly's Department of Research and Studies, and to promote 
increased parliamentary educational and informational 
exchanges.  We also would like to be included in any regional 
programs focused on good governance and commercial law. 
 
¶4.  (U) EDUCATION PILLAR.  Kuwait hopes to tap into either 
regional or country-specific MEPI funds under the 
"Partnership Schools" initiative to support our prior request 
for $150,000 to support two ESL summer camp programs for 
non-elite Kuwaiti youth in the 12-16 age range (Ref C).  We 
also seek support for our request for approximately $28,000 
(Ref D) to bring a representative of Junior Achievement 
International to Kuwait to consult with NGOs, government 
officials and the business community to assess the viability 
of a Junior Achievement chapter here.  All our efforts need 
to take account of Kuwaiti sensitivities about perceived US 
intervention in national education issues, and these programs 
have been designed with that in mind. 
 
¶5.  (U) WOMEN'S PILLAR.  Kuwait has a strong interest in 
participating in the MEPI Business Internship Program for 
Young Women and Middle East Women's Business and Leadership 
conferences.  Numerous Kuwaiti women are active in the 
private sector but continue to face legal, social and other 
obstacles to business advancement.  Many could benefit from 
focused business leadership initiatives.  Post is also 
particularly interested in programs to raise awareness among 
more conservative women in Kuwait about women's legal rights 
and constraints.  In FY 03, post requested and received 
approval for MEPI Democracy Small Grants funding to conduct a 
gender budgeting study in collaboration with a local NGO. 
Post hopes to conduct this study in early 2004.  There is 
also strong interest locally in a related potential 
initiative to analyze government sector wages by gender in an 
effort to broaden grassroots understanding and awareness 
among Kuwaiti women, particularly Bedouin women, about their 
legal rights and status.  Post is also working with IIP on 
recruiting a women's rights activist/political action 
campaign expert who can assess the needs of a nascent women's 
NGO in Kuwait that seeks to modify an administrative law that 
discriminates against women and children. 
MORAN