This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005728 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/07/2013 
TAGS: MARR MOPS PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: NEW AIR FORCE CHIEF TAKES TOUGH TACK ON INCIRLIK, 
F16 EW SUITE 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 4498 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman.  Reasons 1.5 B and 
¶D. 
 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: New Air Chief Gen Ibrahim Firtina took a 
surprisingly aggressive approach on a range of issues at the 
AMB's introductory call 9/8.  First, he surprised us by 
re-opening the F16 EW suite issue which his predecessor had 
agreed to (reftel).  Then he implied that the US was lucky 
Turkey allows the US to use the "unique" Incirlik.  At the 
same time, Firtina implored the US to provide the "penniless" 
Turkish Air Force with a missile defense system and new 
fighter trainer aircraft.  Firtina also repeatedly indicated 
that he wanted to raise these issues with USAF COS Gen Jumper 
(undoubtedly at the 9/11-21 Global Air Chiefs' Conference, 
which Firtina will attend).  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Also surprisingly, Firtina was alone, without even a 
notetaker.  He began the meeting with the claim that Turkey 
was, and is, providing "full support" to the US on Iraq.  He 
therefore couldn't understand US criticism.  But the 
relationship is not a "one-way street."  Throughout the 
meeting, he repeatedly stated his preference for working 
with, and buying from, the US.  Space, weapons training at 
Konya Range, depot-level aircraft maintenance, (Firtina noted 
the number of US-compatible airframes and the capabilities of 
the TUAF to provide maintenance for them which would be 
mutually beneficial), JSF, and "tri-coordination" with the 
Israelis are just some of the potential areas.  Arms sales is 
another.  But the US would have to give Turkey "special 
treatment" in order to preserve this relationship. 
 
 
¶3. (C) F-16 EW DEAL UNRAVELLING?:  While we thought SAF/IA 
Deputy Maj Gen Gration had solved this problem in mid-July 
(reftel), Firtina again made it clear he did not consider the 
tech transfer issue solved.  In the aggressive but imploring 
tone he took throughout the meeting, Firtina said he was 
unhappy with his predecessor Asparuk's agreement to Maj Gen 
Gration's terms ("Asparuk is out.  I am in.")  Saying he 
could not explain the US restrictions to the Turkish public 
(NOTE: This is far from the public's radar scope. End note). 
He implored AMB to go back to the USAF and explain why Turkey 
is "special."  Firtina repeatedly threatened to take this and 
other issues to "his friend" Gen Jumper.  But toward the end 
of the F-16 discussion, Firtina's tone softened ("If the US 
could do this, it would be nice."  "We obviously can't start 
over from scratch -- it will take four years to install, and 
the Block 50's are already halfway through their useful 
life.")  AMB said he had thought the TUAF had agreed to the 
deal arranged with Maj Gen Gration.  This turnaround is 
surprising.  He would ask SAF/IA for its view. 
 
 
¶4. (C) WE NEED U.S. HELP ON SPACE AND MD COOPERATION: 
Firtina was eager to move ahead in these two areas, but he 
again implied Turkey expected the US to foot the bill.  He 
said he had not yet received the letter from ASD Stenbit 
indicating the US is ready to start negotiations with the 
TAFC on a space MOU in late October.  Firtina is ready to 
move forward on this.  India had recently visited Turkey to 
discuss space cooperation, but "we want to work with the US. 
We only talk to others as a courtesy.  You must help us build 
a program."  On MD, AMB mentioned German Patriots which were 
available and appeared to be a good buy.  When Firtina heard 
they were not PAC-3's, he was not interested.  One consistent 
Firtina theme was Turkey's need for systems that would help 
the future of the TUAF, and not older equipment, thus the 
desire for the most modern MD and other items (like T-6 
trainer aircraft). 
 
 
¶5. (C) WE WANT THE RAYTHEON T-6 TRAINER, BUT OUR POCKETS ARE 
EMPTY:  When AMB mentioned that Raytheon officials had told 
him they wanted to sell the TUAF T-6 "Texan" flight training 
aircraft to replace Turkey's aging T-37's, Firtina said he 
was interested.  He even wanted to move up the decision 
timeline.  But "I checked my pockets, and they're empty." 
Nevertheless, he said, Raytheon should "find a way" to 
finance the sale.  AMB said Raytheon would want to discuss 
this with the Turks, if Turkey is serious about buying the 
T-6.  But obviously Raytheon can't give it away. 
 
 
¶6. (C) INCIRLIK IS YOURS:  When AMB asked how Firtina saw the 
future of Incirlik, he answered, "Incirlik is yours.  We hear 
rumors you are considering other places, but Incirlik is 
unique.  It's irreplaceable.  We've given you the opportunity 
to use it -- you must enjoy it." 
 
 
¶7. (C) AIRSOUTH AT IZMIR -- TELL US WHAT YOU NEED:  When AMB 
mentioned that Turkey would have to cooperate with the US on 
schooling and force protection issues if Turkey wanted the US 
to change its unaccompanied policy for Izmir after NATO's Air 
Component Command moved there under the new command 
structure, Firtina said that should be no problem.  "Just 
tell me what you need." 
 
 
¶8. (C) COMMENT:  As mentioned above, Firtina indicated he 
would take these same issues up with Gen Jumper.  While he 
didn't mention it specifically, Gen Firtina will be attending 
the Global Air Chiefs' Conference 9/11-21 and will 
undoubtedly try to use that opportunity.  On the F-16 EW 
issue, we suspect Firtina is not serious about letting the 
Gration deal unravel and is simply trying one last time to 
exact the source codes his predecessor couldn't.  Firtina 
gave the distinct impression the opportunity to bargain still 
existed for the EW system.  He also opted to take a tougher 
line than his predecessor.  This could indicate a couple of 
things.  First, the source code issue is certainly not linked 
to this system alone, and any success in "getting more" would 
provide a precedent the Turks would then use for a number of 
other items on the table (ATAK helicopter, UAV, etc). 
Second, there may be linkage to the issue of Turkish troop 
deployments to Iraq.  With the perceived US need for troops 
to support our mission there, the Turkish military may see 
any troop contribution to the stabilization force as leverage 
on a broader scale for other "strategic partnership" issues, 
such as arms sales.  Although Iraq was not a topic of 
discussion, the Turkish military is inclined to see what, if 
any, offer of "special" support they may garner.  End 
comment. 
EDELMAN