This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 000175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV AND DRL/IRF 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINS SOCI VM HUMANR ETMIN RELFREE DPOL
SUBJECT:  Central Committee on minorities, religious, land 
 
Ref:  A.  FBIS SEP20030122000013  B. Hanoi 0155 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  The second session of the 7th plenum of 
the Communist Party of Vietnam's (CPV) 9th Central Committee 
(CC) apparently focused on key human rights issues of 
national solidarity, treatment of ethnic minorities, 
implementation of religious policy, and land use.  The CC as 
well as CPV General Secretary Nong Duc Manh explicitly 
admitted failures in implementation of official policies and 
incompetent or ill-trained cadres, especially at the 
grassroots level and notably in mountainous areas.  The 
plenum's solutions for these problems appear mainly to 
include strengthening CPV and State control and 
institutions, with an emphasis on heightening "patriotic" 
activities and guarding against "enemy" plots. 
Unfortunately, the CPV's new efforts may exacerbate rather 
than alleviate long-standing problems, and non-recognized 
religious activities and activists may face even tougher 
treatment and scrutiny.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  During an unusual "second phase" meeting of the 9th 
CC 7th plenum January 13-21, the main themes included 
strengthening national solidarity, improving work related to 
ethnic minorities, handling religious affairs better, and 
dealing more successfully with land issues, according to 
media reports (ref a).  (Note:  Embassy requested a post- 
plenum read-out from the CPV on January 15, but is unlikely 
to get an appointment until after the Tet holidays.  Nodel 
Pitts is scheduled to meet with the Government Committee on 
Religious Affairs on January 24 and may learn more about any 
updated religious policy; Deputy Prime Minister Vu Khoan 
reportedly briefed the CRA about the CC's resolution on 
religion on January 21, which the press described as the 
CPV's "first-ever."  Embassy has also requested a meeting 
with the CRA to discuss its January 22-23 national 
conference covering its work in 2002/2003.  End note) 
 
¶3.  (U)  In concluding remarks, CPV GS Manh admitted serious 
problems, including discrimination, lack of mutual trust, 
and the low quality of cadres.  The Plenum's communiqu 
spoke at even greater length about such issues, noting that 
"in some places" -- especially minority and mountainous 
areas -- cadres and party members lacked "solidarity" and, 
in some cases, "took advantage of their positions or were 
corrupt" in the management and use of land.  Manh warned 
that the twin issues of minorities and religion were 
"strategic" and that it was time to "pay attention with all 
our efforts" to these issues. 
 
¶4.  (U)  While reaffirming the right of religious belief or 
non-belief, both Manh and the communiqu emphasized "legal 
activities" and denounced use of "ethnic nationality, belief 
[or] religion" for "illegal activities" aimed at "dividing 
the people" or hurting "national security."  The communiqu 
noted that "in some places, especially in areas of ethnic 
minorities, some believers had used religious belief to 
conduct activities of opposition."  The communiqu called 
for the development of a "spirit of patriotism" among 
religious believers to "defeat the plots of enemy forces 
using religion and ethnic nationality to destroy solidarity 
or oppose the system."   "Foreign relations" related to 
religion should be "coordinated with the foreign policy of 
the Party and State." 
 
¶5.  (U) The plenum's solution for ethnic minority problems 
included "improving the quality of the political system" at 
the grassroots level and ensuring that "hot spots" did not 
emerge in minority and mountainous areas, as well as 
increased and improved use of radio and television programs. 
 
 
¶6.  (U)  Manh noted that the plenum's deliberations on land 
policy and use will be an "important base" when the National 
Assembly looks at a new Law on Land sometime in 2003.  The 
plenum admitted that land issues were "very complicated" in 
some places, often for historical reasons, and called for 
"strengthening the leadership of the Party" and promoting 
the role of the CPV and Vietnam Fatherland Front to bring 
order to the land problem, along with clarifications 
regarding the "responsibilities . . . and management of the 
State" regarding land. 
 
¶7.  (U)  The plenum agreed to remove Minister of Public 
Security Le Hong Anh as head of the CC's Inspection 
Commission, to be replaced by CC member and chairman of the 
CC's Commission for Internal Security Nguyen Van Chi, who 
simultaneously entered the CC's Secretariat.  (Note:  this 
probably was not indicative of any censure against Anh, who 
retains his Politburo seat.  This re-allocation allows him 
to concentrate on the MPS portfolio he assumed last summer. 
End note)  In a probable indication of the severity of 
upcoming "Nam Cam mafia" case, the plenum formally 
"disciplined" Politburo member (and chief of the CC's 
Economic Commission) Truong Tan Sang for "failing to meet 
his responsibilities in investigating and preventing the 
criminal activities of Truong Van Cam," as well as problems 
in "work with cadres," while serving as Ho Chi Minh City 
Party secretary.  Sang apparently did not lose either his 
Politburo seat or his committee chairmanship, however. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Comment:  Embassy will continue to press for a 
fuller read-out in the weeks ahead regarding what must have 
been lively discussions among CC members on these admittedly 
sensitive and often inter-related issues.  The CC's focus 
was, at least, squarely on some of the key human rights 
challenges facing the CPV and GVN nowadays, notably in the 
Central Highlands but also in other areas.  Calls to improve 
the quality and education of cadres at the grassroots levels 
are welcome, if not new.  However, the bottom-line CPV 
determination, in line with earlier plenum resolutions on 
strengthening party leadership at all levels under the 
rubric of "grassroots democracy," likely is to continue to 
reassert greater CPV control and oversight.  At the same 
time, the CPV explicitly encouraged well-meaning (if not 
always well implemented) programs to reduce poverty, improve 
educational opportunities, promote economic development, and 
accept religious activities by recognized religious groups. 
The sharp references to "enemy forces" using religion and 
ethnic nationality for nefarious purposes is a distinct 
reminder that the CPV and GVN likely have diminishing 
patience toward activities by locals or foreigners that even 
hint at separatism or promotion of non-recognized religious 
groupings, however.  House churches, evangelists, and Dega 
nationalists may face even more vigilant scrutiny and 
perhaps harsher treatment by local CPV and GVN authorities 
in the wake of this plenum.  Embassy and ConGen will watch 
for any indications of any such campaign, which could easily 
exacerbate instead of alleviate tensions in minority areas. 
PORTER