This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 006120 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER KISL IR IZ JO MEPP
SUBJECT: ISLAMISTS DENOUNCE U.S. PRESSURE ON IRAN, CALL FOR 
RESISTANCE IN IRAQ AND CLOSURE OF JORDANIAN FIELD HOSPITAL 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY & COMMENT:  Prominent Jordanian Islamists have 
denounced U.S. policy toward Iran, encouraged the Iraqi 
resistance, and called on Jordan to close its field hospital 
in Fallujah, Iraq.  The Acting Prime Minister responded to 
the last demand, defending the hospital's humanitarian work. 
Islamist politicians, foraging for issues to exploit, find 
condemnation of U.S. regional activities irresistible -- even 
when those issues, such as U.S.-Iran relations, have no real 
resonance here.  The Jordanian presence and exposure in Iraq 
generates complex reactions among Jordanians, but we believe 
humanitarian missions, such as that of the military hospital, 
enjoy broad domestic support.  End Summary & Comment. 
 
¶2. (U) In an interview with the Iranian state-run news 
agency, Azzam Al-Huneidi, head of the Jordanian Islamic 
Action Front (IAF) committee for parliamentary affairs, urged 
Iran to resist U.S. pressure to open its nuclear program to 
further inspections and called on the Islamic world and Arab 
states to back Iran in its struggle against Washington. 
Al-Huneidi also stated that such pressure was part of a 
larger American scheme to gain dominance over the countries 
of the region. 
 
¶3. (U) Turning to Iraq, Al-Huneidi repeated the IAF view 
supporting resistance against American and British occupying 
forces.  Noting the mounting American losses in Iraq, he 
claimed that resistance was the only way for Iraq to gain its 
independence.  Al-Huneidi concluded his interview with a 
denouncement of the U.S. "roadmap scheme" and appealed to 
Arab countries, and in particular Jordan, to sever all 
relations with Israel. 
 
¶4. (U) In a similar vein, IAF member of Parliament Mohammad 
Abu Fares called on the GOJ during a parliamentary session on 
September 21 to close down the Jordanian field hospital in 
Fallujah.  Fares asked that the government "pull out of that 
war-torn country and never send any of our troops there, 
putting their lives in danger."  Acting Prime Minister 
Mohammad Halaiqa defended the presence of the field hospital, 
stating that it had treated over 50,000 patients.  Halaiqa 
stressed that Jordan would not cease helping the Iraqi 
people. 
 
¶5. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
GNEHM