This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 002616 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FRANKFURT FOR TSA FOR FRANK HARRIS 
ATHENS FOR TSAR MONTGOMERY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ASEC PTER JO
SUBJECT: IRAQI "SOUVENIR" CAUSE OF FATAL EXPLOSION AT 
JORDANIAN AIRPORT 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED; PLEASE HANDLE ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: An explosive device apparently picked up 
in Iraq as a souvenir by a Japanese photo-journalist 
detonated at Queen Alia International Airport during 
examination by a security guard May 1, killing the guard and 
injuring five others.  The photographer remains incarcerated 
by Jordanian officials, but is expected to be released to the 
custody of Japanese government officials after further 
interrogation.  END SUMMARY 
 
--------------- 
DEADLY SOUVENIR 
--------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Queen Alia International Airport Director Nasri 
Nowar told us that at approximately 6:30 p.m. Thursday, May 
1, a security guard at the airport noticed a 
"suspicious-looking device" during an initial screening of 
the luggage of a Japanese photo-journalist en route to Tokyo 
via Cairo.  Nowar said the guard had moved the luggage to an 
"isolated" table for further inspection, and was in the 
process of examining the device when it exploded in his 
hands, killing him immediately and injuring five others 
standing by.  The explosion also touched off some panic among 
passengers and airport staff who thought the airport was 
under attack, according to Nasri, but airport police quickly 
restored calm.  The terminal was closed for four hours 
pending maintenance and investigation. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Nowar said the photographer, Hiroki Gomi, a 
passenger on an Egyptair flight to Cairo, told police that he 
picked up the device in Baghdad in mid-April as a "souvenir" 
from the war, but had "no idea" it was a type of munition. 
Gomi also told police he had given a similar souvenir to a 
friend from Amman, which police were dispatched to retrieve 
upon Gomi's disclosure.  Nowar said that preliminary findings 
indicated the devices were bomblets from cluster bombs, but 
added that the investigation was ongoing. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) While Gomi could be charged with negligent homicide 
under Jordanian law, Nowar said that it was more likely he 
would be released to the custody of Japanese government 
officials for deportation following further questioning by 
Jordanian military and intelligence officials, as Jordan "did 
not want to jeopardize the excellent relationship we have 
with Japan."  A representative from Gomi's employer, the 
newspaper Mainichi Shimbun, arrived in Jordan over the 
weekend and personally expressed his apologies on behalf of 
the newspaper to the victim's coworkers and assured Jordanian 
officials that the victims would be compensated. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Nowar said none of the other injuries appear to be 
life-threatening.  He said another guard and an Egyptian 
passenger remain in the hospital, but may be released 
tomorrow.  The remaining injured, including a guard and two 
airport baggage workers, were treated on the scene and 
released. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) While clearly rattled by what was an incident 
apparently characterized more by stupidity and negligence 
than by criminal intent, Jordanian civair authorities are 
confident the matter was handled properly by airport security 
personnel.  Nonetheless, they are eager to hear from 
Transportation Security Administration officials, due in 
Amman mid-May, their thoughts on the incident, as well as 
possible recommendations for additional safeguards. 
 
BERRY