This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPART FOR PRM - RGREENE, EUR/SE AND NEA/NGA 
NSC FOR QUANRUD AND BRYZA 
DEPT PASS USAID FOR BHR/OFDA - WGARVELINK/RLIBBY AND FFP 
EUCOM FOR J3, J4, J5 AND POLAD 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
CENTCOM FOR J3, J5 AND POLAD 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2013 
TAGS: PREF EAID IZ MOPS TU
SUBJECT: MFA ON IRAQ REFUGEE/IDP ISSUE:  ACTION REQUEST 
 
 
REF: A. (A) ANKARA 0964 
     ¶B. (B) ANKARA 0946 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch.  Reason: 1.5(b,d) 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request -- see para 8. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Summary:  MFA Depuuty Director General for 
International Political Organizations Tunc Ugdul called 
EconCouns in February 17 to discuss USG and GOT approaches to 
refugee/IDP issues related to a potential Iraq operation. 
Ugdul reiterated that Turkey's intention to set up Red 
Crescent-run camps just across the border was compatible with 
the U.S. approach of providing humanitarian assistance to 
Iraqis beyond that border zone.  He said the GOT agreed in 
principle to opening its borders to NGOs providing 
humanitarian assitance, and asked why no NGOs had yet applied 
for permission.  Ugdul also asked whether the USG planned to 
open a humanitarian coordination center in Turkey similar to 
that established in Kuwait.  Finally, he indicated that the 
GOT was ready to approve the USG request to bring in and 
store one million humanitarian daily rations, subject to 
working out some logistical details.  Embassy will work with 
Eucom regarding next steps on a coordination center, and 
recommends that Washington encourage 1-2 NGOs to test the 
GOT's professed willingness to open its border to them.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) MFA Deputy Director General for International 
Political Organizations Tunc Ugdul called in EconCouns 
February 17 to follow up on recent discussions on 
Iraq-related humanitarian issues (reftels).  Ugdul said he 
wanted to clarify what he termed "different perceptions" in 
the USG and GOT about the outcome of those discussions. 
Specifically, he was concerned by reports that the USG 
thought its approach to the issue was significantly different 
than that of the GOT.  EconCouns noted that the GOT approach 
focused on establishing Red Crescent-run camps just across 
the border, while the USG wanted to deliver food and other 
supplies to Iraqi people where they live.  The USG was still 
not sure whether Turkey would be willing to open its border 
to NGOs so they could bring the necessary supplies from 
Turkey into Iraq. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Ugdul argued that the two approaches were compatible, 
and that Turkey, while establishing its camps across the 
border, would in no way limit U.S. humanitarian efforts.  He 
reiterated (ref A) that NGOs wishing to work in the Red 
Crescent-run camps would need to negotiate and sign an MOU 
with the MFA to ensure coordination.  Those wishing to work 
beyond the border region (i.e. further into Iraq) did not 
need to sign such an MOU, but would need GOT authorization. 
Such NGOs should contact the MFA, explain their goals, their 
proposed areas of operation, and what they planned to bring 
across the border.  Once the GOT approved an NGO's general 
application, the NGO would need to advise the MFA in advance 
of each shipment so that the MFA could coordinate the border 
crossing.    Ugdul said that, while the GOT had not formally 
finalized this approach, his comments reflected official GOT 
thinking at this point.  He asked why no NGOs had yet applied 
to operate across the border, and agreed it would be useful 
for 1-2 "credible" NGOs to apply in the near future.  The 
only issue, he said, would be that the NGOs should confine 
their activity to humanitarian and health work; the GOT would 
not welcome NGOs coming to work in the political area. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Ugdul said the MFA was working with the ICRC on the 
issue of the legal mandate to operate the camps across the 
border.  He expected the GOT to approve shortly the ICRC's 
request to open a temporary office in Turkey, and hoped that 
the issue of legal mandate could be addressed via the Red 
Crescent's membership in the IFRC. 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Noting that the USG had established a Humanitarian 
Operations Center (HOC) in Kuwait, Ugdul asked if the USG 
intended to do so in Turkey.  If so, he suggested the Embassy 
forward a specific proposal.  EconCouns responded that the 
Humanitarian Planning Team had proposed, during its January 
visit, establishing such a coordination mechanism, which 
ideally would be "plugged" into the Kuwait HOC. 
¶7.  (C) Finally, Ugdul said that, after an initial 
misunderstanding, the GOT was now ready to approve the USG 
request to bring in and store one million humanitarian daily 
rations in Turkey, subject to some clarification of 
logistical issues.  Embassy/ODC is following up directly with 
the MFA on this. 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Comment and Action Request:  Embassy recommends we 
test the MFA's new-found openness on this issue.  We will use 
this week's visit of General Pete Osman to discuss 
(internally) next steps on establishing a coordination 
center, and recommend that Washington encourage 1-2 NGOs to 
apply to the MFA for approval to perform cross-border 
operations. 
PEARSON