This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

120927Z Dec 03C O N F I D E N T I A L HARARE 002394 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER, TEITELBAUM 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2013 
TAGS: PGOV ZI
SUBJECT: CALLS TO SEVER TIES NOT CREDIBLE 
 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Kimberly Jemison for reasons 1.5 b/d. 
 
 Summary: (C) A comment in Tuesday's Herald newspaper calls 
for Zimbabwe to sever ties with Britain and Australia.  Such 
a radical step is highly unlikely and British and EU 
diplomats, while admitting that their governments are 
formulating contingency plans, aren't overly concerned with 
the rhetoric of the day, claiming Zimbabwe has too much to 
lose.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) A front page editorial in Tuesday,s Herald newspaper 
encourages the Government of Zimbabwe to sever ties with the 
U.K. and Australia beginning by withdrawing Zimbabwe 
diplomats from Britain and Australia and kicking British and 
Australian diplomats out of Zimbabwe.  The comment cited 
little need &to continue pretending there is a semblance of 
diplomacy with Britain or its Australian appendage(until the 
real differences between the two countries are ironed out and 
until there is genuine respect for Zimbabwe,s total 
independence.8  In taking such a hard line, the comment 
claims other African and Third World countries will celebrate 
Zimbabwe and use its example as a model to liberate their 
respective countries. 
 
¶3. (C) Britain has not put much stock in the threats to sever 
ties, a British diplomat told PolOff.  Nonetheless, the 
British are doing contingency planning.  The implications of 
Zimbabwe,s withdrawal from the Commonwealth, such as 
modifying (visa) programs reserved for Commonwealth members 
and the possible renaming of all High Commissions to 
Embassies, however, require more immediate attention. 
 
¶4. (SBU) If the British High Commissioner were declared 
persona non grata and kicked out of the country, other EU 
ambassadors would probably leave as well, according to a 
Dutch diplomat.  The diplomat believed there to be precedence 
for such a pullout.  If the British High Commission were 
closed by the GOZ, the diplomat opined that the EU 
ambassadors would be called back to their home countries for 
consultations.  Like the British diplomat, the Dutch diplomat 
did not think the GOZ would take such extreme measures 
because the consequences would be too great.  In particular, 
aid from the EU countries would cease. 
 
¶4. Comment:  (C) After further reflection on the 
consequences, it is unlikely that the GOZ will do anything 
more than its withdrawal from the Commonwealth.  Severing 
diplomatic ties with Britain would result in a significant 
reduction in aid, including vitally needed humanitarian aid, 
that would be compounded by the other EU countries likely 
reaction to Britain,s expulsion that would further 
impoverish Zimbabwe.  End Comment. 
SULLIVAN