This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/08/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER PGOV YM COUNTER TERRORISM DOMESTIC POLITICS
SUBJECT: ROYG SEIZES OPPORTUNITY TO INCREASE YEMENI 
POLITICAL WILL TO FIGHT TERROR IN THE AFTERMATH OF RECENT 
TERROR INCIDENTS 
 
REF: A. 02 SANAA 3636 
     ¶B. 02 SANAA 3644 
     ¶C. 02 SANAA 3695 
     ¶D. 02 SANAA 3727 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (S)  Summary:  Formerly on the defensive regarding 
counter-terrorism cooperation with the U.S., the ROYG has 
seized the initiative in the aftermath of the recent terror 
attacks to push forward on broad CT activity and put 
opposition parties on the defensive.  Its public outreach and 
media campaign (refs) continue at a higher pace and are 
joined by increased support and positive popular reaction 
from all elements of Yemeni society.  Yemeni political will 
to fight terror is on the rise.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S)  The ROYG presented its report on terror to 
parliament on December 30, partially in response to requests 
from opposition parties to explain U.S.-Yemeni 
counter-terrorism cooperation in the aftermath of the 
November 3 attack on al-Harithi but also to seize the 
initiative on countering terror.  The report came two days 
after the assassination of Yemeni Socialist Party (YSP) 
leader Jarallah Omar and on the same day as the killings of 
three Amcits in Jibla.  Prime Minister Bajammal added the two 
incidents at the last minute to the already-drafted report 
that was read to parliament, broadcast on television and 
published in the official newspaper.  Notably, in the report 
the ROYG states publicly for the first time that it not only 
cooperated in the November 3 incident but requested the 
action from the U.S.  It also stated that there is nothing 
constitutionally or legally to prevent coordination and 
cooperation with the U.S. and other states.   The report 
emphasized the need for comprehensive economic, educational, 
cultural and social dealings to confront terror and called 
for the mobilization of society to combat terrorism in all 
its forms.  Reaction to the ROYG's report was mixed, with 
opposition parties noting that it did not address the root 
causes of terror and it inferred blame on opposition 
(particularly the Islah party).  ROYG statements after each 
terror incident also mentioned specifically each killer's 
affiliation with the Islah party. 
 
¶3.  (U)  The ROYG Shura Council strongly condemned the 
killings last week in a statement on December 30, urging all 
Yemenis to heighten their vigilance to thwart any terror 
plots and expressing deep regret over what the terrorists did 
to Omar and the Americans.  President Saleh called a 
well-publicized extraordinary cabinet session on January 1 to 
condemn the killings and reiterate the need for national 
unity in combating terror. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Tens of thousands of mourners gathered on January 1 
for the funeral of Jarallah Omar.  In a peaceful procession, 
mourners from all walks of life carried signs saying "no to 
terrorism."  Several anti-violence demonstrations were held 
in cities around Yemen, including Taiz and Bani Husheish, on 
January 2, with demonstrators shouting anti-terror slogans 
and carrying anti-violence banners. 
 
¶5.  (U)  ROYG officials have increased their crackdown on 
mosque preachers who use sermons politically or as a means to 
incite violence, as evidenced by several arrests in the last 
week and by statements in the official televised sermon on 
January 3.  In that sermon, the imam said that "mosques must 
be centers for national awareness" and not the dissemination 
of divisive party ideologies and youths need to be guided 
with regard to true Islam "where there is no fanaticism or 
extremism" and taught "moderation, tolerance and leniency." 
Yemeni religious scholars (ulema) issued a statement strongly 
condemning the attacks and preaching a message of tolerance 
on January 2. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Public and private statements of condolence and 
condemnation of the attacks were written as editorials in 
government and opposition newspapers, issued by political 
parties in public statements and delivered by letter and in 
person to the Embassy from Yemenis across the political and 
social spectrum.  Leaders from the General People's Congress 
(GPC) and Islah party paid calls on the Ambassador to deliver 
condolences personally, and the YSP sent a letter. 
 
¶7.  (S)  The Islah party has been on the defensive after ROYG 
statements linking the two killers of last week's attack to 
their party and to al-Iman University, led by their recently 
re-elected Shura Council chairman al-Zindani.  In public 
statements, they have condemned the attacks and sought to 
distance themselves from them;  however, they have accused 
the government of using the attacks for partisan purposes. 
Interviews with Islah party leaders Sheikh al-Ahmar and 
al-Zindani have been more moderate than usual regarding 
counter-terrorism cooperation and have condemned terrorism. 
 
¶8.  (S)  Comment:  The ROYG has used the opportunity 
presented by recent tragic events to seize the initiative on 
combating terrorism and stigmatizing terrorists.  Its 
stepped-up mobilization of its counter-terrorism campaign has 
put opposition forces on the defensive, particularly the 
Islah party, and forced them to join the anti-terror 
bandwagon or risk being labeled harborers and supporters of 
terrorists.  After two months of attacks on the ROYG for its 
cooperation with the U.S. in the November 3 incident, 
opposition parties are now scrambling for ways to convince 
Yemenis and the international community of their 
counter-terrorism credentials.  End comment. 
HULL