This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000370 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/09/2013 
TAGS: PREL PARM IZ GT UNSC
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA NONCOMMITTAL ON IRAQ IN WAKE OF 
SECRETARY'S UN PRESENTATION 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: STATE 34169 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Due to the absence of President Portillo on February 
6, Ambassador Hamilton discussed Secretary Powell's UNSC 
presentation of the case against Iraq with Vice President 
Reyes (reftel).  The Ambassador concluded that no one prefers 
the option of war, and that the best way to convince Saddam 
to disarm peacefully is for the international community to 
stand united in its determination to compel Saddam to disarm. 
 Differences among the international community over the use 
of force only strengthen Iraq's determination to resist 
complying with UNSC resolutions.  Reyes acknowledged the 
point and said he had watched the Secretary's presentation 
"live, in its entirety, and with great interest."  He did not 
comment on the GOG's position on Iraq, but requested a 
Spanish-language translation of the Secretary's presentation 
(note: A Spanish translation was sent to the Vice President 
as soon as it was received from Washington). 
 
¶2.  (C) On February 10, the DCM raised the issue of Iraqi 
non-compliance with Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez and sent 
him with a Spanish translation of Secretary Powell's complete 
presentation before the U.N. Security Council.  Gutierrez 
expressed appreciation for the translated transcript but was 
also noncommittal as to GOG policy towards Iraq. 
 
¶3.  (C) Comment:  Neither the Vice President nor the Foreign 
Minister provided their views on GOG policy on Iraq.  The GOG 
has traditionally held a policy towards the Middle East that 
has closely paralleled our own.  They are strong supporters 
of Israel for reasons unconnected to us.  The GOG also 
recognizes the degree of importance we attach to this issue. 
Hamilton