This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CA/VO/I, CA/VO/L 
 
E.O.  26598:  N/A 
TAGS: CVIS PREL CMGT AMGT
SUBJECT:  Advisory Opinion Request:  Restriction on Issuance 
of Non-Immigrant Visas in Honduran Diplomatic Passports 
 
 
¶1. Summary.  In light of the widespread abuse of diplomatic 
passports in Honduras, and the request from the MFA to 
assist the GOH in curbing the misuse of these passports by 
persons not entitled to have them, or by persons no longer 
entitled to use them, Post proposes to modify how we provide 
Non-Immigrant Visas to Honduran citizens who possess 
diplomatic passports.   We submit a draft diplomatic note 
explaining the new restrictions.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Background.  Several months ago, MFA officials approached 
us to request help in curbing the unauthorized use of 
Honduran diplomatic passports.  There is little or no 
accountability for diplomatic passport issuance in Honduras 
and persons traveling with them are exempt from paying exit 
fees as well as duties and taxes on goods brought into the 
country.  They also effectively avoid paying the MRV fee. 
The GOH estimates that there are approximately forty 
thousand of these passports currently in circulation.  The 
majority are in the hands of former appointed and elected 
government officials and their families who have terminated 
their official duties, but failed or refused to surrender 
the passports. The GOH has publicly requested the return of 
these passports, without success.  In addition, an unknown 
number of Honduran diplomatic, official, and regular 
passports were stolen from the passport office in San Pedro 
Sula approximately two years ago. 
 
¶2. We propose sending a diplomatic note to the GOH, a draft 
of which is attached, after we receive your guidance on how 
best to adhere to the regulatory guidelines on providing 
visas of any classification to holders of diplomatic 
passports. 
 
Begin text.  The Embassy of the United States of America 
presents its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of the Republic of Honduras and wishes to inform the 
Ministry of a policy change regarding visa applications from 
certain government officials and others who possess 
diplomatic passports. 
 
Effective immediately, bearers of diplomatic passports in 
the following categories are exempt from the $100.00 
processing fee for nonimmigrant visas:  a) current Head of 
State and alternates; b) current Cabinet ministers and vice 
ministers; c) active duty military officers holding a rank 
not inferior to that of a U.S. Brigadier General or Rear 
Admiral; d) career diplomats; e) ambassadors, officers of 
the diplomatic service, consular officers, and military 
attaches assigned to a foreign diplomatic mission; f) 
officers of delegations assigned to an international 
organization; g) magistrates of the Supreme Court of 
Justice; h) territorial governors and their alternates; i) 
presiding officers of the national legislature; and j) 
spouse and unmarried dependent children of the above. 
 
The Embassy will continue to accept applications for 
diplomatic visas on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday 
from 1:00 p.m. to 1:30 p.m.  All applications must be 
accompanied by a photograph of the applicant, a diplomatic 
note stating the individual's government position, and 
travel plans.  The Embassy of the United States requests 
that all persons in possession of a current visa for the 
United States, of any classification, in a non -diplomatic 
passport, present this visa to the consular officer at the 
time of the application for a visa in the bearer's 
diplomatic passport.  Persons on the list above will be 
issued visas upon receipt of a diplomatic note that 
expressly states that the bearer is on official duty status 
for the Government of Honduras.  Persons who only possess a 
diplomatic passport, but are traveling on personal business 
or pleasure must also present evidence that they have paid 
the proper visa fee.  Visas are normally issued in three 
business days.  An employee of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs may drop off the application. 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to reiterate to the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs the assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
¶3. We receive a large number of diplomatic notes requesting 
visas for Hondurans who possess diplomatic passports, but 
who have no current official role in Honduran governmental 
affairs.  Some already have valid tourist visas in their 
regular passports, but want visas in their diplomatic 
passports to avoid paying exit fees and duties on consumer 
products.  Many applicants who have diplomatic passports do 
not have valid regular passports.  They want to travel on 
the diplomatic passport for personal business and avoid 
paying the duties, taxes, and the one hundred dollar MRV 
fee. 
 
¶4. Establishing the proposed modification would provide the 
MFA with the support it needs to refuse diplomatic notes to 
persons using diplomatic passports to get visas for personal 
travel to the U.S.  It would force persons who have regular 
passports, with valid visas, to use them.  It would simplify 
the process for obtaining diplomatic visas.  And, it would 
prevent applicants from using diplomatic passports to avoid 
paying the MRV fee.  We request your opinion on the most 
expeditious manner to correct this misuse of the diplomatic 
privilege. 
PIERCE