This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 001284 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/IP, DS/OCS, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC KSCA PTER HO
SUBJECT: SOFT TARGET VULNERABILITY - TEGUCIGALPA RESPONSE 
 
REF: A. STATE 133022 
     ¶B. TEGUC 1153 (EAC 5/13/03) 
     ¶C. TEGUC 839 (EAC 3/20/03) 
     ¶D. TEGUC 1144 (THREAT COMMUNIQU) 
     ¶E. TEGUC 912 (SEPQ ANTI-U.S. ORG LIST) 
     ¶F. TEGUC 776 (ACEQ CRIME EVAL) 
     ¶G. 12 FAM 334.2 (INTERNATIONAL SCHOOLS) 
     ¶H. 12 FAM 422.4 (PRIVATE SECTOR SUPPORT) 
     ¶I. TEGUC 1221 (USAID SECURITY) 
 
¶1. Reference (A) Para 6, this mission has had an outreach 
program in effect with the Amcit private sector since well 
before 9/11. The program addresses a number of long-standing 
concerns related to violent crime, corruption and judicial 
system problems. The number one concern of Americans and 
Hondurans is the pervasive, ever-present threat of violent 
crime characterized by robberies, carjackings, bank 
robberies, home invasions, murder and street crime. 
 
¶2. The Consul General meets with a wide range of Amcit 
residents in various parts of the country including retirees 
and those involved in education, NGOs, religious missions and 
business. The Economic/FCS section does much the same on an 
ongoing basis, as does RSO in terms of providing security 
advice. The three major areas of concern are crime, 
corruption and land dispute problems - all common to Honduras 
and Central America. 
 
¶3. Honduras has one of the lowest ratios of police to 
civilians in Latin America, and the protection of personnel 
and property has been effectively privatized by the use of 
about 40,000 security guards countrywide versus 5,400 police. 
The case closure rate for murder is 1.5 percent so the need 
for caution is taken seriously. Businesses, fast food shops, 
gas stations, schools, banks and many residences are 
protected by private armed guards and patrols. Facilities 
that might be termed "Soft Targets" already have armed 
security protecting them from the one proven threat-crime. 
 
¶4. Reference (B) and (C) RSO has worked with the local 
schools attended by Mission family members - American and 
Discovery school, (they close 6/12 for summer vacation and 
reopen in late August). They are independent, non-U.S. 
government institutions and have had security in place for 
some time due to the local situation. The more affluent 
students have their own bodyguards. These in-place measures 
and the security at most other facilities is an added benefit 
when faced with the possibility of the global terrorist 
threat. 
 
¶5. Reference (D) outlines the recent communiqu that 
allegedly threatened  American, British and Spanish diplomats 
in Honduras - not the public. The threat was deemed to be of 
concern, but not credible at this time. Reference (E) details 
the politically active Anti-U.S. groups in country that 
demonstrate, but have not been involved in terrorist-level 
actions. 
 
¶6. The Mission website has a RSO section 
www.usmission.hn/english/secuirty.htm that provides a wide 
range of Honduras-specific security briefings including 
personal, residential, vehicle, travel, street, business and 
tourist advice. Additionally, information is provided to 
NGOs, religious missions, health workers and others to stay 
safe. The business security advice notes the risk of 
commercial vehicle hijackings and provides countermeasures. 
The site has a direct hotlink to the RSO office, which is 
used to quickly respond to questions regarding the security 
situation. Issues that are of interest to the Consular 
section are coordinated with the American Citizen Services 
unit. 
 
 
Pierce