This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 002336 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC YM COUNTER TERRORISM DOMESTIC POLITICS ENERGY
SUBJECT: TRIBAL ATTACK ON U.S. OIL PIPELINE LIKELY 
REPRESENTS ANTI-ROYG, NOT ANTI-USG SENTIMENTS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for reasons 1.5. (b and d) 
 
¶1. (s/nf) Summary:  On September 12, tribal elements 
succeeded in damaging U.S.-based Yemen Hunt Oil Company's 
pipeline approximately 60 kilometers from the Marib 
production facility.  A single explosion from an IED of 
unknown specifications made three or four holes in the 
pipeline.  No personnel were injured.  The pipeline was shut 
down for repairs and operations resumed approximately 24 
hours after the incident.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (s/nf) According to Yemen Hunt's General Manager, a 
pipeline leak was reported at 8 a.m. on September 12 and the 
pipeline was shut down at 9 a.m.  There were 3-4 holes in the 
pipeline, the largest of which was about 4 inches in 
diameter.  Note: The 420-kilometer-long pipeline carries oil 
from production fields in Marib to the deep sea port of Ras 
Isa on the Red Sea.  End note.  There were no injuries, and 
Hunt will provide Embassy with an estimate of lost oil when 
available.  Hunt Security Chief said the actual incident took 
place about 4 a.m.  Repairs were delayed until about 10 p.m. 
that day because of the location of the damage, approximately 
60 km from the Marib production facility, and were completed 
at approximately 5:00 a.m.  The company resumed full 
production shortly thereafter. 
 
¶3. (s/nf) The pipeline was damaged in the Sirwah region of 
Marib province, northeast of the capital Sanaa.  ROYG 
military have secured the location.  Initial investigation by 
Hunt indicated the damage was caused by the explosion of a 
single IED of unknown specifications.  Local press reported 
that government officials in Sanaa believe the attackers 
belong to the Jahm tribe, and that the attack was to protest 
the arrest of fellow tribesmen by Sanaa police last month. 
Note: Sirwah is the stronghold of the Jahm tribe, known in 
past years for kidnappings of foreigners and occasional 
bombings calculated to obtain benefits/services from the 
ROYG; most notorious was the July 2001 kidnap of a German 
diplomat.  End note. 
 
¶4. (s/nf) Ministry of Interior Chief of Staff, Brigadier 
General Ahmed al-Sunaidar confirmed to RSO that there is 
security posted on the above-ground portions of the pipeline. 
 The absence of security in the area where the explosion took 
place was due to the fact that the section of pipe was in an 
isolated area previously covered by sand, which shifted, 
leaving the pipe exposed.  Sunaidar committed the MOI to 
investigate the incident and to arrest the perpetrators. 
Because it is very remote, there is no American citizen 
travel warning to the area of the incident. 
 
¶5. (s/nf) Comment:  Tribal interests have occasionally 
targeted the Hunt pipeline in years past.  The September 12 
pipeline attack is notable because it is the first such 
action against the pipeline in well over a year.  Based on 
available information, it appears that the ROYG was the 
intended target of disgruntled tribe members, likely in 
retaliation for the recent arrest of Zaidi shaykhs in Sana'a. 
 There is no evidence of anti-U.S. intent per se.  End 
comment. 
HULL