This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000436 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, PM, PM/HDP; NSC FOR E. 
MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PREF PTER CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Demining:  Advance team prepares the way for 
imminent arrival of quick reaction force in Jaffna 
 
Refs:  02 Colombo 2022, and previous 
 
¶1.  (U) This message is Sensitive but Unclassified -- 
Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Preparations for the arrival of the 
second round of the USG-funded Quick Reaction Demining 
Force (QRDF) are well in gear.  The GSL is proving very 
helpful in arranging for the QRDF's return.  Mission 
expects that the team will work in the same war-torn 
region of Jaffna as last year's team.  The QRDF's 
efforts will serve to underscore continued strong 
support by the U.S. for the peace process.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3. (U) In preparation for the expected March 19 arrival 
of a USG-funded humanitarian demining (QRDF) team in Sri 
Lanka, an advance team, led by PM/HDP Senior Adviser 
Harry McCloy, has begun coordination efforts with the 
Sri Lankan government.  (Note:  This is the second QRDF 
team assigned to Sri Lanka.  A QRDF team operated in the 
northern district of Jaffna from April through October 
last year.)  Since its arrival late last week, the 
advance team has been in close touch with the military, 
civilian offices involved in demining within the GSL, 
and international organizations conducting demining work 
in Sri Lanka. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The advance team found GSL interlocutors to be 
extremely helpful in coordinating the arrival of the 
QRDF team.  (Note:  The full team will include about 20 
Mozambican nationals and four dogs.)  The advance team 
also found government officials responsive to its 
concerns about assigning an appropriate task for the 
QRDF.  Priority areas for demining in the Jaffna 
Peninsula are mainly set by the Government Affairs (GA) 
office in Jaffna city, along with other actors.  The 
GA's representative, P. Sundarampillai, toured five 
different sites with the advance team and military 
representatives in the Jaffna area, March 12-13.  All of 
the parties involved in determining the site -- the GA's 
office, MoD, the advance team, etc. -- agreed that a 
site near the devastated town of Chavakachcheri was 
superior to the rest for purposes of the QRDF.  (Note: 
This site is adjacent to land in an area called 
Sarasalai that the first QRDF team demined last year. 
To highlight the QRDF's activities, the Deputy Secretary 
visited this area during his August 2002 visit to Sri 
Lanka.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) The advance team also attended a "National 
Steering Committee Mine Action" meeting on March 13 to 
review the upcoming arrival of the QRDF.  (Note:  The 
"National Steering Committee" is a government- 
coordinated body that brings together public and private 
groups involved in demining.)  The meeting was 
constructive, with the advance team concluding that the 
QRDF's planned activities fit in well with Sri Lanka's 
national demining priorities, as well as efforts by 
international and local NGO's.  In fact, NGO 
representatives expressed strong support for the return 
of the QRDF. 
 
¶6. (SBU) COMMENT:  Mission looks forward to the imminent 
arrival of the full QRDF team.  As with the efforts of 
the first QRDF team, the work this team will do will 
underline strong U.S. support for the peace process, aid 
in the safe return of displaced persons, and foster 
goodwill among Sri Lankans toward the U.S.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶7. (U) PM/HDP Senior Adviser Harry McCloy did not have 
the opportunity to review this message. 
 
¶8. (U) Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS