This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 000549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR FOR ANDREA GASH DURKIN 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC, AND EB 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR EAID PGOV HO WTRO
SUBJECT: HONDURAN TRADE POLICY IN CAFTA, FTAA AND WTO 
NEGOTIATIONS - A PROJECT IN PROCESS 
 
REF: a) SECSTATE 36401 
 
     b) SECSTATE 15027 
     c) SECSTATE 50753 
     d) SECSTATE 26895 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  The Honduran government remains 
overstretched by the efforts to simultaneously establish a 
new trade team and participate actively in its new and 
ongoing trade negotiations.  Melvyn Redondo is emerging as 
the key figure in forging a congruent Honduran trade policy, 
but CAFTA by necessity will take up most of the GOH's 
attention in the trade arena.  Until the Ministry is able to 
staff up, develop fully a new organizational structure and 
get a clear picture of its overriding trade policy 
interests, it will be difficult to obtain clear Honduran 
positions on WTO Doha agenda and FTAA issues (except perhaps 
for high profile political issues such as the TRIPS 
moratorium for certain pharmaceuticals).  In CAFTA, the GOH 
objectives are to maintain the U.S. market access they 
already have, obtain duty free treatment for textiles and 
apparel made of regional product, protect sensitive 
agricultural products, look for opportunities in the 
services negotiation, obtain expedited sanitary- 
phytosanitary procedures that allow additional agricultural 
export to the U.S., and improve the ability of Honduras to 
attract foreign investment.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Embassy has delivered several demarches (see 
reftels) in recent months on WTO negotiations on 
agriculture, industrial market access and the financial 
services negotiations, as well as the TRIPS moratorium.  To 
date, it has been difficult to obtain clear enunciation of 
Honduran policy in these areas.   After Econcouns in January 
2003 emphasized the importance of Honduran support for the 
U.S. position on agriculture and the TRIPS moratorium with 
Trade Minister Norman Garcia, we were told that supportive 
instructions were being sent to Geneva, but no details have 
been available to date.  Garcia informed us he intends to 
rely on Melvyn Redondo, a former member of the Honduran 
mission to the WTO in Geneva and current chief negotiator 
for the Central American free trade talks (CAFTA), to 
develop WTO positions.  In a February 21 meeting, Redondo 
told Econcouns that he has not been following the issues 
lately but would do so after he gets back from the second 
CAFTA round in Cincinnati. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The FTAA negotiations have also been lost in the 
shuffle.  GOH trade ministry contacts indicated bafflement 
at being left out of El Salvador's market access offer for 
the region in February (El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua 
and Honduras generally participate jointly) and indeed were 
unaware that an offer had been made by the other three 
countries until receiving an inquiry from AUSTR Vargo - in 
fact, we aren't sure the GOH was even aware that FTAA offers 
were due.  Honduras' market access negotiator in CAFTA's 
first round (where it was made clear by the U.S. side that 
FTAA offers were necessary to proceed in CAFTA) is from the 
Finance Ministry and perhaps did not pass the information 
along.  We understand that a stand-alone offer by Honduras 
was prepared hastily.  Redondo now plans to coordinate the 
GOH position for the FTAA as well. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In CAFTA, Redondo said the GOH's principal 
objective is to maintain the U.S. market access they already 
have.  He noted disappointment that the USG is seeking to 
start off market access negotiations from the MFN tariff 
level, but indicated understanding that this was an initial 
(and not final position).  Textiles is a vital sector of 
opportunity for the GOH.  Hondurans are hoping that the 
agreement will allow them to compete with Asia after 
elimination of quotas in 2005 by providing duty free 
treatment for textiles and apparel made of regional product. 
The GOH seeks to protect sensitive agricultural products 
(mentioning yellow corn, poultry and rice).  Honduran 
negotiators are looking for opportunities in the services 
negotiation; they expect pressure from the private sector to 
protect certain professional services.  Redondo emphasized 
that the GOH would like CAFTA to be Honduras' principal 
forum for negotiation with the USG on services.  The GOH is 
putting strong emphasis on obtaining expedited sanitary- 
phytosanitary procedures that will allow additional 
agricultural export to the U.S. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In the trade capacity building arena, the GOH is 
asking if it is feasible to request help with creation of a 
mechanism to attract foreign investment.   Emboffs have 
drawn the trade officials' attention to existing U.S. 
programs, such as the Trade Development Agency, the Overseas 
Private Investment Corporation and Eximbank, and USAID's 
programs in country.  In addition, we have discussed the 
positive effect of lower tariffs and other trade 
restrictions on generating interest by foreign investors. 
Finally, the Embassy at all levels continuously emphasizes 
the need for the GOH to improve the investment climate. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: The GOH is rightly putting its priority on 
the CAFTA negotiations.  Unfortunately, the extremely 
limited depth of the trade team makes it difficult for the 
USG at this time to address effectively our broader trade 
agendas.  We continue to work closely with the Ministry to 
improve its trade negotiating capacity (with a variety of 
USAID, USDA and PAS programs) and to emphasize the 
complementary nature of the negotiations in the WTO, FTAA 
and CAFTA.  Hopefully, as the GOH team gets more experience, 
USG requests for support in the WTO and FTAA will be met 
more promptly.   End Comment. 
 
Palmer