This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 SANAA 001256 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KJUS IZ SA YM COUNTER TERRORISM TERFIN
SUBJECT: FBI DIRECTOR MEETS WITH PRESIDENT SALEH, MINISTER 
OF INTERIOR, AND PSO DIRECTOR 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin summary:  FBI Director Mueller met with 
President Saleh on Monday, June 2 during a brief visit to 
Aden.  Mueller and his delegation also met with Minister of 
Interior Rashad Alimi and head of the Political Security 
Organization (PSO) General Ghaleb Gamish.  Issues discussed 
in these meetings included: 
 
--  The role of the new LEGATT Office in Sanaa in 
facilitating CT cooperation 
 
--  The importance of continued liaison and CT cooperation 
 
--  The return of Yemeni detainees at GTMO 
 
--  ROYG re-education of "former" Al-Qaeda members 
 
--  The smuggling of weapons and explosives from Yemen, Saudi 
Arabia, and Iraq 
 
--  USS Cole Escapees 
 
--  U.S. efforts to extradite Yemeni cleric Mohammed Ali 
Al-Moayed from Germany 
 
--  ROYG requests for assistance: equipment, training, etc. 
 
 
¶2.  (C)  Also in attendance:  Ambassador Edmund Hull, FBI 
Executive Assistant Director for Counterterrorism Pat 
D'Amuro, in-coming LEGATT Stephen Gaudin, and Mueller's 
Counselor Jonathan Solomon.  End summary. 
 
-------- 
Overview 
-------- 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Director Mueller arrived in Aden on June 2 as 
part of a larger regional tour.  The Director met with 
Ambassador Hull upon arrival to discuss agenda items for the 
Director's meeting with President Saleh.  Arriving in Yemen 
from Saudi Arabia, the Director was able to provide a 
valuable assessment of the current situation there.  He noted 
SAG's renewed activism in the fight against terror and their 
concern about the transfer of weapons and explosives from 
Yemen -- specifically from the weapons souk in Saada.  SAG 
also provided the Director with a list of items confiscated 
during illegal border crossings from Yemen that was 
mentioned, but not delivered, to President Saleh. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Ambassador highlighted intelligence indicating 
that a Saudi based group tried to recruit Abu Assem 
(Al-Makki), number two on the U.S. most wanted list for 
Yemen, to conduct terrorist acts in Saudi, which Abu Assem 
declined.  This is a warning and it should serve as a message 
to the Yemenis that these individuals must be apprehended. 
 
------------------------------------ 
President Saleh and Director Mueller 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  Starting a cordial meeting with President Ali 
Abdullah Saleh, Director Mueller conveyed President Bush's 
thanks for continuing ROYG efforts, particularly the recent 
arrest of IIS agents.  Mueller presented Stephen Gaudin to 
Saleh as the new Legal Attache-designate to Yemen, noting his 
years of experience in CT and his involvement in the East 
Africa Embassy bombings investigation.  Gaudin's selection is 
evidence of the FBI's long-term commitment.  The FBI will 
send additional personnel to support him, increasing the 
frequency and quality of its exchanges with the Political 
Security Organization (PSO) and the Ministry of Interior 
(MOI).  Mueller also introduced Executive Assistant Director 
for Counterterrorism Pat D'Amuro.  Based out of Washington, 
D'Amuro will be traveling throughout the region, including 
Yemen, to met with his counterparts in the months ahead. 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  President Saleh welcomed Mueller and stressed his 
wish to enhance cooperation and coordination between the FBI, 
PSO, and MOI.  He also noted the importance of information 
sharing to continue the joint efforts to arrest those 
responsible for terrorism and identify "sleeper" Al-Qaeda 
cells in Yemen. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Return of Yemeni Detainees at GTMO 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  President Saleh cited the recent return of Saudi 
detainees from GTMO to SAG.  He said that, when the U.S. 
investigation of Yemenis at GTMO is complete, they should be 
handed over to Yemen so ROYG can conduct their own 
investigation and perhaps uncover more sleeper cells.  Saleh 
noted that, at the end of the day, the USG is not going to 
adopt tough measures against these individuals, but Yemen 
can.  These people must be a burden to the U.S. and ROYG is 
only trying to help. 
 
¶8.  (S/NF)  Mueller affirmed that USG authorities continue to 
look at the individuals at GTMO and will take appropriate 
steps when their investigations are complete.  ROYG has had 
an opportunity to meet with Yemenis at GTMO. 
 
¶9.  (S/NF)  Ambassador Hull added that there is a request for 
additional information from ROYG about some of the people in 
Yemeni custody. 
 
--------- 
Al-Moayed 
--------- 
 
¶10.  (S/NF)  President Saleh noted that the USG wants to 
prosecute Sheikh Mohammed Ali al-Moayed, but ROYG considers 
him a businessman, not a terrorist.  He suggested that the 
U.S. have the CIA and FBI investigate al-Moayed's activities, 
and, when the investigation is over, the U.S. should turn 
al-Moayed over to ROYG who will perform their own 
investigation. 
 
¶11.  (S/NF)  Director Mueller assured President Saleh that 
significant evidence of links to terrorist financing has been 
collected against al-Moayed and the case against him is quite 
strong. 
 
------------------------------- 
Re-education of Former Al-Qaeda 
------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (S/NF)  Saleh outlined an ongoing ROYG initiative to 
re-educate former Al-Qaeda members.  The goal is to get them 
to repent and pledge their loyalty to ROYG and the country. 
This program is being run through moderate religious clerics, 
and Saleh believes it will provide ROYG with valuable 
information that will lead to the apprehension of more 
people. 
 
¶13.  (S/NF)  Mueller expressed concern that while these 
"reformed" individuals may promise not to commit terrorist 
attacks in Yemen, they may do so somewhere else.  President 
Saleh assured that these individuals are not permitted to 
leave Yemen.  Saleh noted that people with "blood on their 
hands" were not eligible for this program.  He added that 
last Ramadan (Nov/Dec 2002) the ROYG released 36 "reformed" 
individuals who were all doing well, proof that ROYG's 
re-education -- a mixture of religion, culture, and education 
-- is working. 
 
¶14.  (S/NF)  Saleh also said that the fact that nothing 
happened to Americans in Yemen during the war in Iraq was 
important evidence that ROYG's intervention, especially 
Saleh's personal intervention, was effective. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Precarious Regional Security Situation; Saudi Factor 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶15.  (S/NF)  Comparing the lack of central control in Iraq to 
the situation in Yemen after the 1994 civil war, Saleh said 
the bombings in Saudi Arabia were due in part to the flow of 
arms out of Iraq.  Director Mueller countered with the Saudi 
theory that the weapons used in these attacks actually came 
from Yemen.  While noting that it was a possibility, Saleh 
asked why the Saudis fail to control their own borders, 
including the Yemeni one. 
 
¶16.  (S/NF)  Mueller noted that the question of Saudis 
controlling their borders is a separate issue from the 
ability to buy weapons -- RPGs, explosives, etc. -- from 
Yemen.  Saleh mentioned ROYG's weapons-buyback program -- in 
the last few months ROYG says they have bought-back about 
70-80% of the weapons from the souks -- but again cited 
instability in Iraq as an immediate threat.  Saleh said that 
weapons dealers in Yemen have been trying to get permission 
to go to Iraq because the weapons there are cheaper.  Saleh 
also noted that members of the "former Iraqi regime"  were 
now selling weapons and munitions to Al-Qaeda, although he 
gave no sources. 
 
¶17.  (S/NF)  Saleh later agreed with the Director and the 
Saudis on proliferation from Saada (a northern city with a 
large weapons souk), confirming that ROYG knows the 
explosives used against the Cole and explosives used to 
target Saleh's residence were from Saada. 
 
--------------------------- 
CT Cooperation and Training 
--------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (S/NF)  Saleh said that while cooperation with CIA is 
good, cooperation with FBI is only fair; the ROYG has needs 
that should be discussed.  Mueller said that is why Steve 
Gaudin has been assigned to Yemen for the next two years as 
the first Legal Attache permanently assignment to Yemen. 
Mueller also noted that the FBI will conduct a two week 
course on crime scene investigation, evidence collection, 
etc. at the end of July for 24 Yemeni officials.  Equipment, 
which the officials will retain, will also be provided. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Sidebar:  President Saleh and Director Mueller One-on-One 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶19.  (S/NF)  At the conclusion of the delegation's meeting 
with the President, Saleh dismissed everyone except Director 
Mueller (and the President's interpreter) to have a private 
exchange.  During this sidebar, Saleh informed the Director 
that ROYG has information indicating that disaffected Iraqis 
are contacting elements of al-Qaeda to plot against U.S. 
interests.  No details or sourcing were provided. 
 
----------------- 
USS Cole Escapees 
----------------- 
 
¶20.  (C)  During a working lunch hosted by Minister of 
Interior Alimi and PSO Director Gamish, discussion continued 
on numerous issues including the April 11 escape of ten 
prisoners from a high-security prison facility in Aden.  Four 
of the ten were implicated in the October 2000 attack against 
the USS Cole. 
 
¶21.  (C)  PSO Security Director Gamish noted that they have 
proved difficult to find, but the investigation continues. 
ROYG distributed names and photos of the escapees, there is a 
reward, and ROYG is trying to find their hideouts.  President 
Saleh and Gamish both commented that intel indicates the 
escapees are still in Yemen. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Requests for Assistance and New CT Unit 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶22.  (C)  Both Alimi and Gamish had a list of items their 
respective organizations require to improve their 
effectiveness, including computers, crime scene processing 
kits, and magnetometors.  Alimi also announced the 
establishment of a new CT Unit as called for by a recent Arab 
League ruling.  ROYG has given this unit a site, but the unit 
will require training and equipment before it is fully 
operational. 
 
¶23.  (C)  Director Mueller suggested that the U.S. has found 
small vetted units to be more effective than large divisions. 
 He added that those who receive specialized training must 
use it (i.e. no good to train people and then transfer them 
to a unit where they don't use that skill).  Alimi agreed and 
noted that personnel selection is key; however, ROYG needs 
larger units to ensure that qualified individuals are 
available when they are needed.  Gamish explained that 
turnover is high due in part to the importance of family.  If 
a family member is needed at home or elsewhere, they will go. 
 
 
¶24.  (C)  Ambassador Hull noted the importance of maintaining 
these skills with periodic exercises. 
 
-------------- 
Press Coverage 
-------------- 
 
¶25.  (C)  Press coverage of the Director's visit was limited, 
but positive, highlighting increased bilateral cooperation 
and USG appreciation for ROYG's efforts to combat terrorism. 
(Note:  Many weekly papers have not yet published.) 
 
¶26.  (U)  Text of the Embassy's official press release: 
 
(Begin text.) 
 
FBI Director Mueller Visits Yemen; Meets President Saleh 
 
Robert Mueller, Director of the U.S. Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, met with Yemen's President Ali Abdullah Saleh 
in Aden Monday to discuss counter-terrorism and legal 
cooperation. 
 
Director Mueller's brief stopover in Aden came as part of his 
tour of the countries in the region to discuss the global 
struggle against terrorism.  Director Mueller briefed 
President Saleh on his talks with Saudi officials regarding 
the latest terrorist attacks in Riyadh that left more than 
thirty people dead.  He also underlined the existing close 
security cooperation between the United States and Yemen, and 
expressed the hope that the relationship would continue and 
develop further.  In this regard, he told President Saleh 
about the establishment of a LEGATT (Legal Attache) office at 
the U.S. mission in Sanaa. 
 
Also, attending the meeting in Aden were Yemeni Interior 
Minister Alimi and PSO Chief General Ghamesh as well as U.S. 
Ambassador to Yemen Edmund Hull. 
(End text.) 
MISENHEIMER