This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:    DECL:  09-17-13 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PINS PHUM KISL CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Tiger attacks in the east spark deep Muslim 
anxiety about the peace process 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1615, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead. 
Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.   (C) SUMMARY:  Attacks by the Tigers in the east have 
intensified Muslim anxiety about the direction of the 
peace process.  Muslim leader Rauf Hakeem has pressed 
the GSL to take a harder line toward the Tigers.  While 
Hakeem continues to back the government, some in his 
party have indicated a willingness to bolt to the 
opposition.  There are also unconfirmed reports that 
Muslim extremist activity in the east is on the rise. 
As the GSL possibly enters into discussions aimed at 
turning over de jure interim control of the north/east 
to the Tigers, Muslim concerns are bound to rise.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) HEIGHTENED MUSLIM ANXIETY:  Recent attacks on 
Muslims in the east have intensified Muslim anxiety 
about the direction of Sri Lanka's peace process.  In 
the most recent flurry of attacks, which took place in 
the mid-August timeframe, up to five Muslims were 
killed, and numerous Muslim-owned businesses and homes 
were burned down in attacks carried out by Liberation 
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) cadre (see Reftels).  Two 
Tamils, who may have been affiliated with the LTTE, were 
also killed in apparent counterattacks by Muslims. 
Since the August wave of attacks concluded, Mission has 
received additional reports that Muslims in the east 
have been harassed by LTTE cadre and forced to pay taxes 
to the group.  In particular, LTTE pressure on Muslims 
living in the town of Mutur south of Trincomalee and 
along the coast in Ampara District is said to be quite 
high (see Reftels).  When queried about the situation, 
M.A.M. Mahroof, a UNP MP from Trincomalee District, told 
us on September 16 that trucks he owns have been 
recently stolen by LTTE cadre, and that his constituents 
have faced similar problems with the hijacking of 
vehicles and pilfering of supplies by the LTTE. 
 
¶3.  (C) The cumulative impact of the August attacks and 
those in previous months, as well as the constant 
harassment, is weighing heavily on Muslims.  (Note:  In 
addition to the August wave, serious Muslim-LTTE 
skirmishes took place in the east in March-April 2003, 
October 2002, and June 2002.)  M.L.A.M. Hizbullah, a 
National Unity Alliance (NUA) MP from Batticaloa 
District, told us on September 17 that Muslims in the 
east "deeply distrust" the LTTE and remained very 
worried that the government was not fully committed to 
protecting them.  Hizbullah added that he thought 
Muslims and the LTTE could still come to some sort of 
"understanding," but additional attacks instigated by 
the LTTE would stretch relations to the breaking point. 
 
¶4.  (C) MUSLIM LEADER PRESSES GSL:  In reaction to his 
community's concerns, Rauf Hakeem, the leader of the Sri 
Lanka Muslim Congress (SLMC), and Minister of Ports and 
Shipping, has publicly urged the government to crack 
down on the LTTE.  In response, G.L. Peiris, the GSL's 
public spokesman, has said the government was trying to 
do its best within the parameters of the peace process. 
Hakeem, who in the past has been part of the GSL team at 
the peace talks, has also advocated that Muslims be 
allowed to send their own separate delegation to join 
the government and LTTE delegations at any future rounds 
of talks.  The government has basically agreed to allow 
Muslims to do this.  The LTTE continues to object to the 
idea, however, asserting that there are only two sides 
to the conflict, the Tigers and the Colombo government. 
 
¶5.  (C) THREATS TO BOLT GOVERNMENT:  Although Hakeem 
continues to back the government, some in his party have 
bitterly complained about the situation in the east and 
have indicated a willingness to bolt to the opposition 
in protest.  A.L.M. Athaullah and M.B.M. Abdul Cader, 
two SLMC MPs from the east, for example, have been 
highly critical of Hakeem and the GSL, claiming that 
Muslims need security and the government was failing 
them.  While both men remain technically in the SLMC 
fold, they have made clear that they would cross over to 
opposition ranks if more was not done for Muslims. 
Given its slim majority in Parliament, even a move of 
several seats could precipitate a fall in the United 
National Party (UNP) governing coalition.  For these 
reasons, Hakeem and other members of the government, 
including Prime Minister Wickremesinghe himself, have 
been working overtime to ensure that the SLMC dissidents 
were carefully catered to and were not tempted to 
defect. 
 
¶6.  (C) RADICALIZATION IN THE EAST?:  Amid the latest 
spate of violence in the east, Mission has heard fresh 
reports that some Muslims have become radicalized and 
have joined armed groups.  These groups, which are 
reportedly quite small, are said to have names like 
"Osama" and "Jihad."  In a recent conversation with 
polchief, M.N. Junaid, the Interior Secretary and a 
Muslim who keeps close watch on the situation in the 
east, reported that he thought the latest tensions in 
the east might be helping spur the formation of radical 
groups.  Junaid noted, however, that the GSL did not 
think that the group's were large in size, nor did they 
possess many weapons, and overall did not form much of a 
threat.  Nonetheless, the government continued to 
closely monitor the situation.  In a sign that the level 
of anxiety is even affecting normally moderate 
politicians, however, Ferial Ashraff, a MP and leader of 
the NUA, was recently quoted as warning the government 
that Muslims might need to take up arms to protect their 
interests. 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT:  Tensions in the east seem only set to 
rise in coming months, unfortunately.  This assessment 
is based on the possible start of direct negotiations 
between the government and the Tigers over the GSL's 
north/east interim administration proposal.  If the 
government's proposal is accepted in its broad outlines, 
it would effectively provide the LTTE with de jure 
interim control of the north/east pending a final 
settlement of the conflict.  Muslims, who represent 
somewhere over 30 percent of the population in the east 
(and seven percent nationally), probably will play 
hardball with the government to ensure that their 
interests in the east are fully protected.  The GSL's 
problem is that the LTTE might not be in the mood to 
provide the needed assurances -- or, if given, Muslims 
may not believe them.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD