This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000653 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR PD/WHA (MBUCKLEY); IIP/G/WHA DIPASQUALE; EB/EPPD DCLUNE; 
USTR AGASH 
INFO IIP/T/ES 
EMBASSIES FOR PAOS, IOs, 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO HO PA ETRD USTR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON IRAQ 
 
 
¶1. TV TALK SHOW "FRENTE A FRENTE" 3/12 - Renato Alvarez 
director and anchor interviewed President of Honduras, 
Ricardo Maduro on different topics related to his 
administration. During this hour long program key issues 
such as Iraq and CAFTA were discussed at length. 
 
"Question: If the United States unilaterally goes to war, 
will it have the support of Honduras?" 
 
"President's answer: I would like to make myself clear on 
this, an international terrorist is like a criminal-- we 
have to fight against crimmals, in a firm way, we have to be 
clear that in any issue of terrorism and crime we all have 
to cooperate.  Obviously the United Nations is analyzing the 
case, we all wish that Iraq disarm effectively to avoid this 
potential threat of war - not just the United States 
suffered the tragedy of 9/11 but whole world suffered too. 
The wish of peace is our wish." 
 
"But also I would like to make it clear, here in Honduras we 
do fight crime, and we will also support the international 
fight against terrorism." 
 
 
¶2. "Weekly supplement of La Prensa" 3/8 San Pedro Sula-based 
liberal paper, carried an editorial entitled: "For Peace": 
 
" War no, Peace yes - is the slogan of sincere pacifists, 
who perfectly understand that in war the real victims are 
the citizens.  We have to understand that after the attacks 
in New York and Washington U.S. society feels the serious 
threat of the "evil axis", 
 
".The United States has a strong tendency towards 
unilateralist actions. It is difficult for the United States 
to learn and assimilate the rules of the international 
political game." 
 
"It doesn't mean that those who call for confrontation to 
eliminate the tyrant, who invaded two neighbors and 
massacred to Kurds, are motivated solely by ideals of 
freedom and democracy; and those who raise their voices for 
peace-- do it with an altruistic spirit. A hidden war exist, 
the mother of all battles-- between European and north- 
American multinationalists, because of the petroleum." 
 
" The petroleum reserves are the framework of this war which 
we hope does not occur. What we hope for a peaceful end to 
the end of the craziness of the tyrant, so that we avoid 
future crisis." 
 
 
Palmer