This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
For US Treasury Virginia Cantor 
 
E.O.  12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL GT WHA PDA
SUBJECT:  Vital Voices Meets With Guatemalan Women 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary:  Vital Voices Global Partnership held a two-day 
Women's Leadership Retreat in Guatemala City in July.  Present at the 
conference were approximately 40 women leaders from diverse 
backgrounds.  The Ambassador hosted a reception in honor of the group 
attended by more than 100 women and civic leaders.  The goal is of a 
democratic Guatemala with an educated, uncompromising populace that 
will weed out corruption and promote transparency, ethics, and freedo 
The women were passionate about their country and exuded relentless 
perseverance to reform institutions, legal frameworks, and even 
societal mindsets.  End Summary. 
 
Vital Voices Global Partnership in Guatemala 
--------------------------------------------- --------------------- 
¶2.  (U)  The two-day conference itinerary focused on techniques and 
channels for women's leadership and ethics in a democratic society, a 
strategies to combat trafficking in women and children. The 
facilitators were joined by Virginia Cantor, Senior Counsel for Ethic 
at the Department of Treasury.  They provided thought-provoking 
questions and moderated discussions of the Guatemalan women leaders. 
Their technique was to create a forum conducive to openly and candidl 
sharing stories, thoughts, beliefs, strategies, plans, and actions; 
their modus operandi was extremely effective, and led to stimulating 
and honest dialogue and a successful conference. 
 
The Vision of Guatemalan Women 
--------------------------------------------- 
¶3.  (U)  POL Intern attended three hours of the conference and was 
struck by the courage and tenacity of the Guatemalan women.  Among th 
40 participants there were indigenous and ladino women, educators, 
lawyers, health workers, political staffers, journalists, 
veterinarians, and business, government, and nonprofit leaders.  They 
were from cities and rural areas with different upbringings, 
educational backgrounds, experiences, and opportunities.  They shared 
the same characteristics of leadership; they were articulate and spok 
with clarity and authority.  They shared the same vision for Guatemal 
and were willing to dedicate their lives in order to realize this 
dream. 
 
¶4.  (U)  In their discussion of ethics and corruption they touched up 
sexual harassment by labor inspectors in the factories, bribery, misu 
of government funds at the local and federal levels, wasting of time, 
depriving people of education as a tactic to concentrate power, and 
lack of access to power.  One of the most poignant quotes aptly 
summarizing the thoughts and desires of the women present:  "We need 
prioritize collective interests over personal interests.  We need to 
reconstruct the social fabric that has been so fragmented.  New 
generations need to be taught these principles.  Development is 
integral for all people, not only a few.  We must become agents for 
change because the country demands it.  This is for our children.  We 
need to promote the rights of human beings to live different lives." 
Another woman stated, "I hope when we leave here we have strategies." 
 
Future Action 
------------- 
¶5.  (U)  As a result of the conference, the women formed four 
commissions which will work to develop public relations and gain 
financial support.  The commissions will meet to review the proposed 
political agenda for the ongoing electoral process.  They plan to set 
an agenda that will become the basis for their joint efforts towards 
more democratic and prosperous Guatemala.  Coalition members have 
contacted other groups and individuals to build their alliance for wh 
they hope will be a national women's movement. 
 
Comments 
------------ 
¶6. (U) The Guatemalan women who convened for this conference possesse 
the passion and intellect necessary to promote economic development a 
democratic reform in their country.  They demonstrated the capacity t 
construct abstract theories and principles, strategize and plan, and 
translate their blueprints into action.  These women exhibited great 
promise as current and future leaders in Guatemala. The conference 
mobilized, strengthened, and equipped these women for the challenge 
ahead. 
 
HAMILTON