This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 001253 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL KPAL CA FAC
SUBJECT: MIDDLE EAST: CANADA WELCOMES ROADMAP, RECOMMENDS 
SIDELINING BUT NOT HUMILIATING ARAFAT 
 
REF: STATE 111481 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (U) Canadian Foreign Minister Graham issued a statement 
praising the release of the Quartet's Roadmap, and saying it 
bolsters the prospects for peace in the Middle East.  Graham 
said the Roadmap and the confirmation of Abu Mazen as 
Palestinian Prime Minister were the "first positive things we 
have seen in a long time" in the peace process, and called on 
all parties to take the steps needed for the Roadmap's 
implementation. 
 
¶2. (C) We discussed the Roadmap and reftel points with Don 
Sinclair, Foreign Affairs Director General for Middle East 
and North Africa, who commended the U.S.'s willingness to 
take this on.  While Sinclair agreed with our points on the 
need to bolster Abu Mazen's position, he strongly disagreed 
with the tactic of shunning Arafat.  Sinclair and his Foreign 
Affairs colleagues argued that despite Arafat's 
obstructionism and incompetence, he remains a major symbol of 
nationalism for Palestinians.  If we deal exclusively with 
Abu Mazen and humiliate Arafat, Sinclair continued, it would 
put Abu Mazen in an untenable position, as he would be seen 
by Palestinians as beholden to Israel and the U.S.  Jonathan 
Laine, Foreign Affairs Senior Advisor for the MEPP, recalled 
how Palestinians had rallied around Arafat during the IDF 
siege of his Ramallah headquarters in 2002. 
 
¶3. (C) Jill Stirk, Foreign Affairs Director for the Middle 
East, emphasized the need for quick results after the release 
of the Roadmap.  The window of opportunity would only be open 
briefly, and there were many on both sides ready to derail 
the process.  While incidents on both sides are inevitable, 
she said, we need to show progress in order to instill 
confidence.  Sinclair said that the Palestinians needed to 
take the first step by ending terrorist attacks, but that 
Israel must immediately "reward" this effort.  The key issue, 
Sinclair continued, will be eliminating Israeli settlements, 
which will allow a return to the 1967 borders (with some 
modifications as agreed by the parties). 
 
¶4. (C) Sinclair told us that Canada is ready to help in any 
way it can, but would wait for U.S. suggestions and guidance 
on what role it should play.  He noted that Canada has a 
reputation in the region for evenhandedness, and that it has 
done considerable work on the refugee issue.  Looking ahead, 
Sinclair said that Canada has already offered to contribute 
military personnel if there is agreement on a third party 
presence.  Despite Israeli resistance, Canada wants to 
explore the third party option as a less destructive, more 
humane alternative to the fence currently being put in place. 
 
¶5. (C) Sinclair said that including Egypt and Jordan in our 
Palestinian security force training plans was brilliant.  He 
did not expect our Quartet partners, which are distrusted by 
the Israelis, to add much value to the process.  The 
leadership onus, Sinclair emphasized, will be on the U.S. 
The parties themselves, if left alone, were incapable of 
following through.  If the Roadmap is to work, Sinclair 
concluded, the U.S. must take charge. 
CELLUCCI