This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001700 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/14/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER MARR PINR YM MARITIME SECURITY COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: ADEN: YEMEN COAST GUARD GRADUATION, AIRPORT 
SECURITY, AND AMIDEAST 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Begin summary:  Ambassador Hull traveled to Aden on 
July 8 for a series of meetings highlighting the Governorate 
of Aden and ROYG's commitment to security and development. 
He met with newly-appointed governor, Dr. Yahya Al-Shaibi 
(septel); attended a ROYG graduation for training conducted 
by the U.S. Coast Guard; met with the Director General and 
Deputy Director General of Aden Airport; and bid farewell to 
Amideast representative Edward Prados.  Ambassador was 
accompanied by OMC Chief, Coast Guard Representative, Public 
Affairs Officer, Assistant RSO, PolOff (notetaker), and 
Political Specialist.  Representatives from numerous media 
outlets covered the events.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------------ 
U.S. Coast Guard Training Graduation 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U)  A five-person U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) team 
instructed 21 Yemeni officers from the Yemen Coast Guard, 
Navy, and Special Forces in a nine-day "Waterside Port 
Security Course (CG-28)."  The Ambassador attended the July 8 
graduation ceremony and made a brief statement on the 
importance of continued U.S.-Yemen maritime cooperation. 
USCG trainers were impressed by the students' attitude and 
ROYG cooperation.  The ceremony was also attended by Deputy 
Governor Abdul-Karim Shaif who noted that maritime 
cooperation to thwart the terrorist threat was still in its 
infancy and "close cooperation with the U.S. must continue". 
He thanked the U.S. for the training and vowed to find ways 
to increase the level of cooperation.  (Note:  See septel. 
The graduation was covered by numerous media outlets, 
including the Yemen Observer, Al-Ayyam, Saba News Agency, and 
Al-Tariq.  The Ambassador and the Lieutenant-in-Charge of 
U.S. Coast Guard training were interviewed by Al-Ayyam.  End 
note.) 
 
¶3.  (U)  Following the graduation, the Ambassador hosted a 
lunch for the Deputy Governor and officials from the Yemen 
Coast Guard, Navy, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and 
Hodeidah Shipping Company.  Conversation focused on the 
operating parameters of the Yemen Coast Guard, including the 
legality of customary fees, stateless vessels, and "piracy" 
vs. "larceny". 
 
-------------------------- 
Aden International Airport 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S)  Before departing, Ambassador sat down with Aden 
Airport Director General Mohamed Jumeia Al-Khadhar and Deputy 
Director General Mohamed Al-Funasi to discuss strengthening 
security at Aden International Airport (see bio note para 
#7).  DG Al-Khadhar provided the Ambassador with a history of 
the Aden Airport from the 1940s to present day, and discussed 
ongoing renovations.  He highlighted the extensive 
cooperation between the airport and the U.S. and produced an 
overflowing dossier of flight clearances and diplomatic notes 
from the U.S., including correspondence during the USS Cole 
investigation.  Khadhar and Funasi discussed the airport's 
security at length, including talking through hypothetical 
scenarios raised by the Ambassador, and escorted the 
Ambassador on a private tour of the airport facilities -- 
stopping for a demonstration of the Terrorist Interdiction 
Program (TIP) PISCES system.  Funasi welcomed the 
Ambassador's proposal for a USG security assessment team 
visit within the next six months, and expressed interest in 
additional training opportunities. 
 
-------- 
Amideast 
-------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Edward Prados, Amideast's Aden Director, discussed 
the new Governor of Aden, Aden atmospherics, and education 
initiatives during breakfast with the Ambassador, PAO, and 
PolOff.  Prados, who has been working in Yemen for over three 
years, is scheduled to depart later this month.  Sharing some 
of his observations, Prados noted that the selection of a new 
Political Security Chief, and an ambitious and open-minded 
Governor, are positive developments for the entire 
governorate.  He called the December 2003 opening of a new 
shopping complex -- constructed by businessman and Member of 
Parliament Hayeel Saeed -- and the selection of Aden as a 
World Bank Port City as concrete examples of positive change. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Prados also identified areas for continued study 
prior to the launch of E-Learning, the MEPI funded Internet 
in Schools project for 20 schools Yemen-wide (5 in Aden).  He 
said that empowering teachers is key to the long-term success 
of the project, and voiced concern about schools' ability to 
cover recurring costs like electricity.  PAO clarified that 
over half the E-Learning budget is designated for training 
and curriculum development, and teacher training will be an 
integral part of the program's implementation.  PAO also 
discussed the importance of gaining the support of the 
business community to ensure adequate funding for recurring 
costs, and, if possible, to expand E-Learning beyond the 20 
pilot schools. 
 
-------- 
Bio Note 
-------- 
 
¶7.  (U)  Bio note - Aden Airport Deputy Director General 
Mohamed al-Funasi:  Al-Funasi spent two years with the 
British Royal Marines and worked on security at airports in 
the Netherlands and Germany.  He is a graduate of FAA's 
Crisis Management and Installation Security courses.  End 
note. 
 
HULL