This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 SANAA 000576 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/22/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: TF1Z01: SANAA VIOLENT DEMONSTRATION 3/21 
AFTERMATH;  EAC MEETING 3/22 
 
REF: A. SANAA 574 
     ¶B. SANAA 573 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  As of 1500 local March 22, no 
demonstrations are occurring in Sanaa after the violent 3/21 
demonstration caused numerous deaths and injuries of 
civilians and police (reftels). Security has been further 
augmented around the Embassy, with the addition of more 
Yemeni security personnel and armored vehicles. 
 
-- President Saleh issued a strong statement the evening of 
3/21 condemning the violence and calling the demonstration 
illegal.  He also inserted a note of solidarity with the U.S. 
on preventing terror while continuing to state opposition to 
the war in Iraq, supporting Saleh's statement supports post's 
expectation that the President is keen to prevent further 
unauthorized demonstrations getting out of control. 
 
-- At a 3/22 meeting with MOI Brigadier General Sunaidar, DCM 
expressed appreciation for security provided during the 
demonstration and condolences for Yemeni deaths and injuries. 
 Sunaidar said he would participate in questioning those 
arrested, and noted that one detained instigator of the 3/21 
demonstration is a leading figure in Yemeni's chapter of the 
Iraqi Baath Party. 
 
-- Post received further information early 3/22 about the 
location of the Yemeni Ambassador's residence in Baghdad 
after weeks of requests by the Embassy. 
 
-- EAC met at 1400 to discuss the security situation.  Key 
offices and personnel represented at the meeting included: 
AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, ORCA, OMC, SOC 
YEMEN, FPD and RMO.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
President Saleh's Strong Statement 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  On Yemeni television and published prominently in 
the government daily al-Thawra, President Saleh issued a 
statement after his National Defense Council and Higher 
Security Committee meeting calling the 3/21 demonstration 
illegal and condemning the violence.  He also said he would 
not allow unauthorized demonstrations and combined sympathy 
for the Iraqi and Palestinian peoples with the American 
people after 9/11.  Text of statement, as translated by FBIS 
and Embassy, in paragraph 14. 
 
¶3.  (C)  In a message from Saleh, senior Presidential Advisor 
Mohamed Sudam told the Ambassador that opposition parties 
were responsible for the violence at the demonstration. 
Several parties, including the Iraqi Baathis, Nasserites and 
al-Haq, were involved and a Baathi leader was the first to 
speak at Tahrir Square.  Sudam said that Islah party members 
were also involved at the beginning of the demonstration, but 
"faded away" long before the demonstration moved to the area 
near the Embassy and turned violent.  He also said the 
General Prosecutor will investigate and prosecute those 
responsible. 
 
-------------------- 
MinInterior Response 
-------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  DCM, accompanied by Consul and RSO, met with 
Brigadier General Sunaidar, Office Director for the Minister 
of Interior 3/22.  Sunaidar said he will participate in 
questioning those arrested in the demonstrations, starting 
afternoon 3/22.  They will focus initially on those who spoke 
to and stirred up the crowd in order to get the demonstration 
moving.  Sunaidar indicated they do not have a full list yet 
of those arrested, but one of them he identified as a leading 
figure in Yemen's relatively small chapter of the Iraqi Baath 
party.  DCM passed Ambassador's thanks to the Minister and 
appreciation for Saleh's statement.  DCM inferred, in light 
of President's remarks, that the authorities will be 
anticipating any further unauthorized demonstrations, and 
that they will be prepared to deal with them more quickly. 
Sunaidar indicated he did not know of express orders to this 
effect, but agreed that indeed it was likely the authorities 
will move quickly to head off unauthorized demonstrators. 
The list of American citizens in Yemen requested by the MOI 
to provide better security was also discussed, and Sunaidar 
requested the list in Arabic which Embassy will provide. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Sunaidar said that the actions of the security 
forces were their "duty" and they were prepared to do it 
again.  In terms of security enhancements, more personnel and 
hardware have been provided and higher restrictions on 
movement instituted.  He also requested assistance from the 
USG in training its riot police on more efficient tactics for 
crowd control, including training for personnel and provision 
of equipment. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Below the President's statement in al-Thawra, an 
article quoting a source from the Ministry of Interior was 
published.  Text of statement, as translated by Embassy, in 
paragraph 15. 
 
------------------------------------- 
After-Midnight MFA Visit: 
Finally Providing Baghdad Coordinates 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  After two months in DIA channels and more than 
three weeks through MFA channels, MFA finally responded to 
Embassy request for more precise information on the Yemeni 
Ambassador's residence in Baghdad.  While no one had the GPS 
coordinates, the MFA sent someone who knew Baghdad well to 
the Embassy at 0115 Saturday 3/22 to find the residence. 
After poring over satellite photos for more than 45 minutes, 
the location was pinpointed.  More follow up will be 
conducted if additional maps and photos are obtained. 
 
¶8.  (S/NF)  The Yemeni Ambassador to Iraq was recalled and is 
in Sanaa, although other Yemeni diplomats remain in the 
Baghdad residence.  Official Saba news agency reported 3/20 
that the Yemeni embassy in Baghdad would remain open to 
provide consular services and assistance to Yemenis wishing 
to return home. 
 
------------------------------- 
Embassy Standing Fast; 
EAC Meeting 1400 local March 22 
------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (S)  Embassy personnel remained at StandFast and EAC 
agreed to maintain StandFast at least through an EAC meeting 
on March 23 to assess the situation.  All was quiet during 
the night, and watchstanders detected no untoward activity 
around the perimeter.  ORCA reported no new threats. 
 
¶10.  (S)  EAC discussed in detail each tripwire that might 
warrant a change in Embassy security posture.  EAC agreed 
that a few tripwires, including killings of Americans, 
demonstrations not controlled by ROYG, mosque sermons 
inciting anti-Americanism, serious Yemeni casualties in the 
suppression of demonstrations and a U.S. attack on an Arab 
country, bear close watch.  EAC members concurred that no 
tripwire has been crossed to date, and that possible 
recurrence of violent demonstrations posed greatest present 
risk of a wire being tripped.  EAC consensus was not to 
recommend a request for authorized departure at this time. 
 
-------------- 
Media Reaction 
-------------- 
 
¶11.  (U)  Official daily al-Thawra ran President Saleh's 
statement and the MOI's statement prominently on the front 
page.  Reporting on the demonstration was placed on page 
three and was factual and not inflammatory.  The editorial 
called for "national responsibility" to "confront any 
attempts that might destabilize the internal front." 
English-language newspaper Yemen Observer 3/22 did not report 
on the demonstration, concentrating on Iraq and the upcoming 
parliamentary elections. 
 
¶12.  (U)  International television press, including CNN, 
al-Jazeera and MBC, reported the demonstration and showed 
footage of the 12-year old boy who was killed.  In an 
interview with its Sanaa-based correspondent, Al Jazeera said 
that the security forces showed restraint in responding to 
stonethrowers and small arms fire.  International written 
press reported widely on the violent Sanaa demonstrations, 
although usually as a lead for a lengthier article on 
demonstrations throughout the region and the world. 
 
¶13.  (C)  CNN has run repeated ticker-line reports and other 
accounts estimating demonstrators at 30,000.  This is a huge 
exaggeration of the 5-7,000 marchers and the 6-800 hard core 
demonstrators who remained to clash with police once violence 
began. 
 
----------------------- 
Text of ROYG Statements 
----------------------- 
 
¶14.  (U)  Text of President Saleh statement: 
 
In the name of God, the most beneficent, the merciful.  The 
holding of this meeting, which includes members of members of 
the National Defense Council and the Higher Security 
Committee comes in the context of addressing ourselves to 
today's incident which took place after Friday prayers. The 
incident was accompanied by chaos. The demonstrators headed 
for both the northern and Western region in the direction of 
the U.S. embassy. 
 
The demonstration, with much regret, resulted in the death of 
a number of victims, a child and citizen, and 14 security 
personnel, as well as nine civilians were injured. 
 
We regret this painful incident. We are of the view that the 
people of Yemen had expressed their views in open and clear 
manner in the demonstrations they held last Saturday (15 
March). The demonstrations were held in the capital, Sanaa, 
provincial and some districts headquarters. The 
demonstrations expressed the opinion of the people of Yemen 
and their political stand, at the official (government), 
people's and party levels. 
 
We expressed our opinion of objecting to the war against 
Iraq. We also expressed our view regarding what the Arab 
nation of Palestine was facing, ranging from killings, 
terrorism and cleansing. 
 
We consider today's incident, as announced through reports by 
the security organs, a violation of the law.   As for today's 
incident we consider it as a shortcoming and a disruption of 
national security, despite the fact that government and 
people's opinions are in agreement, contrary to other Arab 
countries. 
 
There are three considerations upon which we have expressed 
our position.  We expressed opposition to the war against 
Iraq,  we condemned the torture and terrorism of the people 
of Palestine, and we have condemned the terrorist actions 
which are directed against the United States and directed 
against the nation of Yemen. 
 
In this country, the constitution, law and order govern us. 
Any demonstration by any political group in this country 
should adhere to the law and seek permission. Any political 
group has the right of expressing its opinion peacefully. But 
if it happens that this is unlawful and foolish and if it 
harms the security of the nation, it does not aid anyone 
except the enemies of the nation and does not aid the 
foundation of Yemen. 
 
Regarding the terrible situation in Iraq, this is indeed 
frightful and scary. However, we as Yemenis and as Arab 
Muslims aren't the only ones that have been harmed or 
suffered pain. The whole world is harmed by what has resulted 
from this disaster. 
 
We all generally object to the war against Iraq and what the 
Palestinian people are facing. We all condemn terrorist 
activities against the United States of America and against 
our country and against the lands of the Arabs and the 
Muslims and what has happened to the Palestinians. This 
position is agreed upon, by all of us, even those who have 
different views and different politics. 
 
End of Text. 
 
¶15.  (U)  Text of al-Thawra article quoting MOI source: 
 
A well placed source in the Ministry of Interior told Saba 
news agency that the massive demonstration resulted after 
Friday prayers, did not have permission to conduct a 
demonstration from the Ministry of Interior, thus breaking 
the law. Furthermore, the security forces defended against 
the demonstrations through the march that occurred through 
the streets of the capital that approached the American 
Embassy. The demonstrators were trying to take control of the 
Embassy. 
 
Some riotous elements among the demonstrators concealing arms 
started to fire randomly, a behavior that prompted the 
policemen to fire upward and disperse the crowd with tear gas 
and water hoses. 
 
The source added, "14 policemen were injured, three 
critically, two demonstrators were killed and nine injured." 
The source explained that security authorities managed to 
hold some demonstrators suspected of firing their weapons, 
committing vandalism acts on cars and other properties 
belonging to citizens and they will be brought to court. 
 
And at the end of his presentation, the source encouraged all 
of the brotherly citizens to express their ideas peacefully 
and far from the acts of hooliganism and to govern themselves 
with the order and law that are in the interests of the 
country. 
 
End Text of article. 
HULL