This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000990 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ASEC CASC ECON EINV NI
SUBJECT:  NIGERIA: OIL COMPANY SECURITY 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: Ambassador Jeter, Consul General 
and CG Lagos staff met EXXON/MOBIL, Halliburton and 
ChevronTexaco Managing Directors on May 27 to 
encourage more timely notification of the Mission in 
the event of hostage-takings, occupation of 
facilities, or interruption of oil company operations. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) During a meeting hosted at Embassy request by 
the ChevronTexaco Managing Director Jay Pryor, 
Ambassador Jeter expressed concern about the lack of 
timely Embassy notification of security crises in 
which American citizens and oil production facilities 
are involved.  Most recently, the Transocean rig 
takeover in April 2003 was not reported to Post until 
almost one week after the crisis began.  Ambassador 
Jeter told the representatives that the Mission could 
be helpful in resolving future crises just as it was 
helpful in enlisting National Labour Congress 
President Adams Oshiomole to end the Transocean 
platform occupations and hostage-takings.  He noted 
that the Embassy could also engage the Government of 
Nigeria (GON) at the highest levels including the 
President, National Security Advisor, State Security 
Service and others, as it did during the Transocean 
crisis.  In that instance, Embassy intervention may 
have preempted plans to use military force that might 
have proved dangerous for the hostages.  Post also 
kept Washington and other official players well 
informed with up-to-the-minute analysis of the 
situation. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Company representatives expressed reluctance 
to share immediate information with Post, fearing that 
the Freedom of Information Act (FIA) requirements 
might require the release of the information to 
others, including the media. They pointed out that the 
immediate aftermath of an incident was a critical 
negotiating period when publicity could prove harmful. 
Unless serious injury is imminent, companies prefer to 
negotiate without Embassy intervention unless 
intervention could be discreet.  The companies would 
be willing to be more forthcoming with information if 
given assurances that the USG would not release 
information into the public domain. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Despite their reservations about 
confidentiality, the companies want to maintain 
 
SIPDIS 
frequent contact with the Mission on security matters. 
All agreed that meetings to discuss security issues at 
the level of the Ambassador and Managing Directors 
should be held every two months.  In addition, there 
are regularly scheduled OSAC meetings for company 
security directors, which are fully endorsed and 
supported by company Managing Directors.  The next 
such meeting is scheduled for June 10.  Finally, 
company representatives were encouraged to engage the 
re-elected Obasanjo Administration on problems in the 
Niger Delta, particularly on security and the 
breakdown of law and order, which have accelerated in 
recent months.  The three companies agreed that due to 
this increase in crime, conducting business in safety 
and security has become more precarious and difficult. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Embassy will be looking at ways in which 
oil and oil service companies and the Mission can 
exchange information in real time.  It was agreed that 
information received in a timely manner is the only 
way to maintain the appropriate level of security. It 
also was agreed that future meetings should be 
expanded to include other major oil producers, such as 
Shell and Agip.  Future meetings will focus on 
modalities for improving security for the oil 
community, Nigeria's law enforcement capabilities to 
combat rising crime levels, development of a Code of 
Conduct for local oil company employees, and the role 
of the Embassy's Corporate Responsibility Officer. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) COMMENT: The Managing Directors were very 
grateful for this meeting.  Noting that this was the 
first time that the Embassy had taken such an 
initiative to systematically explore ways of improving 
oil company security.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
JETER