This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001951 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON WAR IN IRAQ 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- Banner headlines carried in the front pages of all 
Arabic dailies today, April 1, highlight Iraq's 
statement that 54 of the coalition forces were killed 
in "fierce" battles in the south of Iraq.  Another 
lead story in all papers highlight King Abdullah and 
Queen Rania's condolence visit to the families of the 
five Jordanians who fell victim to bombing by 
coalition forces earlier in the war.  Majority of 
commentaries in Al-Rai newspaper, in particular, seem 
to defend Jordan's clear stand towards the Iraqi war. 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "Iraqi victories are real" 
 
Daily columnist Bater Wardam writes on the op-ed page 
of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour 
(04/01):  "One of the most important claims made by 
the supporters of the aggression is that it is 
impossible for Iraqi to achieve military or political 
victory over the United States, and that all these 
Iraqi sacrifices would be useless at the end of the 
day when faced with the technical power of the 
American invasion army.  In reality, the Iraqi 
resistance managed to achieve many victories, whose 
outcome may not be apparent on the military arena for 
the moment, but are political achievements of the 
first caliber, and thus must be focused upon.  The 
first accomplishment of the Iraqi resistance is its 
coming together in unity for the defense of the land 
against the invasion.  The issue is no longer about 
the legitimacy of the Iraqi regimes, but rather about 
the fate of the Iraqi state..  This resistance and 
this steadfastness has cost the Iraqis a great deal, 
but has accomplished a very important outcomes, namely 
showing the American invasion for what it really is: 
an aggression and invasion for the purpose of 
occupation and control of resources.  This resistance 
also proved the falseness of the Iraqi opposition and 
its lack of popular grounds on Iraqi territories.  The 
resistance proved that this group that met in London 
under the auspices of the CIA does not have the 
capability to change anything on the ground and is 
rejected by the Iraqi people even more than the regime 
is rejected..  Let us also not forget the cumulative 
effect of he Iraqi resistance on the Arab conscience, 
which we hope will continue its awakening..  Yes, the 
Iraqi people are suffering a great deal now from the 
American brutality.  Yet, these few days have 
destroyed many fables in the Arab world and in the 
world.  Very soon, the United States is going to pay a 
huge cost for its stupidity, but only if millions of 
Arabs and Muslims take advantage of this massive tide 
of emotions and turn it into effective action that 
makes up for the sacrifices of the Iraqis.  Would the 
Arabs rise to the level of this responsibility?" 
 
-- "Stop Jordan's retribution" 
 
Columnist Samir Hiyari writes on the op-ed page of 
semi-official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai 
(04/01):  "Sounds like the Jordanian memory requires 
continuous reminders of Jordan's achievements, 
accomplishments and positive stances with regard to 
the struggles ongoing to our west and to our east.. 
We would inflicting upon ourselves great injustice 
when we hold ourselves and our country in retribution 
without taking into consideration the complete 
reality, the royal efforts to resolve the crisis, and 
the size of Jordan with its capabilities and influence 
on the ground.  Some, for example, are calling for a 
more honest role towards the war on Iraq, and some 
simply forget that the world in 2003 is not the same 
world in 1990..  There is no vagueness and no mystery 
when it comes to the Jordan's stand.  Rejecting the 
war on Iraq, feeling with the brotherly people in 
Iraq, and dealing with what is going on with civility 
and responsibility have marked the King's address to 
his people.  After all, King Abdullah's achievements 
were not focused on a personal interest.  It is the 
responsibility of a Hashemite leader keen not to see a 
single drop of blood shed in any Arab country." 
GNEHM