This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 007874 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/03/2013 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM ECON JO
SUBJECT: KING ABDULLAH OPENS PARLIAMENT WITH SPEECH 
EMPHASIZING REFORM; NEW SPEAKER CHOSEN BY ACCLAMATION 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 07805 
 
     ¶B. AMMAN 06812 
     ¶C. AMMAN 06491 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David Hale for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) King Abdullah inaugurated December 1 the regular 
session of the 14th Jordanian Parliament with a speech 
detailing his vision for the country.  The King called for 
both political and economic development, including an 
emphasis on democracy and transparency, closely echoing his 
October 23 public letter outlining the goals for his new 
government.  Following the speech, former government minister 
Abdul Hadi Majali was elected speaker of the Lower House 
without opposition.  End Summary. 
 
------------------- 
ROYAL PRONOUNCEMENT 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) King Abdullah opened the 14th Jordanian Parliament's 
"ordinary session" on December 1 amidst much fanfare.  The 
Parliament had previously held an "extraordinary session" 
from July 16 to September 28 (see ref c).  After a thunderous 
21-gun salute and shouts of "Long live the King!" from East 
Bank tribesmen, the King delivered the traditional Speech 
from the Throne before the joint houses of Parliament, 
members of the royal family, government officials, foreign 
dignitaries and the press. 
 
¶3.  (U) At the outset of his 25 minute speech, the King 
called for Jordan to become "a model of a democratic Arab 
Islamic State, based on justice, under the sovereignty of the 
law, political pluralism and respect of citizens' rights." 
He acknowledged the "vital and active legislative role" of 
Parliament and his desire that it be a "legislative chamber 
that distinguishes itself in its performance, and a source to 
which our Government refers for assistance when it works out 
its comprehensive plans and national programs."  The King 
challenged MPs to take a leading role in "combating 
corruption, favoritism, and 'wasta'" and to put "the national 
interest before all the personal interests of his/her 
electoral precinct or those of his/her relatives and 
acquaintances." 
 
¶4.  (U) The King said his overall goal for Jordan was 
"comprehensive development" based on the following five 
"foundations:"  1) a society built upon justice, equality, 
transparency, respect for human rights, and the rule of law; 
2) the guarantee of women's rights to ensure their 
participation in all aspects of society, as well increased 
attention to the country's youth; 3) a "culture of democracy" 
with respect for the views of others and acceptance of 
differences of opinions; 4) an independent and neutral 
judiciary, along with a modern media sector operating in an 
environment of "pluralism and responsible freedom;" and 5) a 
"bold mentality that adopts radical changes in the modes of 
thinking and the mechanics of decision-making." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
DEVELOPING THE ECONOMY & CULTIVATING DEMOCRACY 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5.  (U) The King stated that his government would "work 
relentlessly to raise the economic growth rate, provide work 
opportunities for youth, and alleviate the problems of 
poverty and unemployment."  To achieve these goals, the King 
proposed improved educational programs and stronger 
coordination between the needs of the labor market and the 
educational/vocational training systems.  Recognizing the 
leading role of the private sector in economic development, 
the King called for "an investment environment capable of 
attracting capital" which would aid in the transition from a 
"traditional economy to a modern one based on science, 
knowledge and productivity." 
 
¶6.  (U) The King declared that it was the duty of all sectors 
of society, including civil society organizations, to create 
"a radical, positive transformation in our democratization 
process."  He further noted that political parties with 
"comprehensive, integrated national programs" were "vital and 
necessary" for the country, and that these parties should be 
established by "the grassroots," as opposed to "individuals 
or groups that are brought together by transient interests." 
The King acknowledged the legitimacy of opposition groups, 
stating that, "We look forward to the day when nationalist 
opposition parties that are loyal to Jordan will be partners 
in making our national decisions." 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
PRAISE FOR SECURITY FORCES, SILENCE ON FOREIGN POLICY 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) King Abdullah went out of his way to extol Jordan's 
military and security forces, expressing "pride and 
appreciation for their omnipresent role in defending the 
Homeland," and stating that "our interest and care for them 
shall continue to top our national priorities."  The King 
warned against "falsely charging these forces or belittling 
their sacrifices" and pledged to modernize their capabilities 
and improve their living conditions.  These comments, an 
apparent retort to criticism heard in Parliament last month 
of the security services, prompted prolonged, pronounced 
applause from security service dignitaries in the audience. 
 
¶8.  (C) In contrast to his trumpeting of domestic reforms, 
the King paid scant attention to foreign policy matters.  He 
devoted only a few sentences to the subject at the end of his 
address, most notably saying that Jordan would not spare any 
effort "until justice has been achieved in Palestine and Iraq 
and until the peoples of these two brotherly peoples enjoy 
their independent free will." 
 
----------------------------- 
AN ENDORSEMENT FROM THE PRESS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) Reactions to the King's speech in the local press 
have been uniformly positive (consistent with decades' old 
practice) with editorial writers commending King Abdullah for 
trying to move the country in the right direction.  Mixed in 
with this praise, however, is a note of skepticism on whether 
the King's vision will be implemented.  As expressed in the 
Arabic daily Al Arab Al Yawm, the speech needs "a serious 
translation into reality," while another journalist wrote 
"what remains is to translate the big titles into actual 
policy and law." 
 
----------------------------- 
SPEAKER CHOSEN BY ACCLAMATION 
----------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (U) Following the King's speech, the Lower House of 
Parliament chose Abdul Hadi Majali (East Banker, Kerak - 2nd 
District), the head of the conservative National Action Front 
bloc, by acclamation as its Speaker.  Majali, a previous 
Lower House Speaker and former chief of the Public Security 
Directorate and Minister of Public Works, ran uncontested 
after his opponents dropped out of the Speaker's race one by 
one during the last two weeks.  Key to Majali's success was a 
pledge of support from the Islamic Action Front (IAF), which 
had previously backed incumbent Speaker Saad Hayel Srour. 
Majali will serve a one-year term after which the Lower House 
will elect a new Speaker. 
 
¶11.  (C) The choice of Majali, a traditionalist from a family 
which has long served the security establishment, comes as no 
great surprise from a Parliament structured to give primacy 
to East Bank conservatives.  However, his selection by the 
House casts into sharp relief the gap between the liberal 
rhetoric of the King and the conservative instincts of the 
House. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶12.  (C) The King's speech strongly parallels the contents of 
his public letter of October 23 designating Faisal al-Fayez 
as Prime Minister (see ref c).  He has not backed away from 
his previous call for deep-rooted political and economic 
reform.  The one noteworthy difference in the King's speech 
is its unqualified support for the security forces.  Given 
reservations within the security apparatus about the wisdom 
of empowering civil society and greater democracy, this may 
have been included to assuage their concerns and reassure 
them of their continued importance in government. 
 
¶13.  (C) Despite the speech's promise to "adopt a 
comprehensively-planned, clearly-defined path to economic and 
social reforms," the GOJ has yet to reveal a specific action 
plan to achieve the King's lofty goals.  As PM Fayez told A/S 
Burns during their November 30 meeting (ref a), the GOJ will 
first try to reach the broadest possible consensus for change 
through its ongoing dialogue efforts before developing a plan 
in the coming months. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman or access the site 
through the State Department's SIPRNET home page. 
HALE