This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2013 
TAGS: PREL NL EUN
SUBJECT: DUTCH COMMENTS FOR NOVEMBER 17-18 EU FMS MEETING 
 
REF: SECSTATE 313454 
 
Classified By: A/PolCouns Nathaniel P. Dean Reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) In advance of FM de Hoop Scheffer's participation in 
the November 17-18 GAERC, Dutch European Correspondent Joep 
Wijnands offered substantive comments on Israel, Iran, 
Afghanistan and ESDP (reported septel).  While the EU meeting 
with Israel is happening on the margins of the GAERC, the 
Dutch expect this to be the major discussion topic at both 
formal and informal meetings. 
 
Israel 
-------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Wijnands reports that all EU FMs (not just the 
troika) have chosen to meet and speak with one voice during 
their side meeting with Israeli Foreign Minister Shalom, 
strongly stressing three key points.  The Dutch expect a 
tense discussion.  Using recent UNGA resolution wording, the 
FMs will emphasize the importance of both the need to 
dismantle the Israeli fence and withdrawal settlements in 
Palestinian territory.  They will also state their 
displeasure with the Israeli government's decision not to 
meet with any EU personnel who have met with Arafat.  Many 
within the EU have called for a boycott of Israel's 
Ambassador in Brussels as a retaliation to this behavior. 
(Note:  Dutch FM de Hoop Scheffer stated publicly that it is 
not yet time for such a decision.  End Note.)  The Dutch want 
to maintain strong European relations, both politically and 
economically, with Israel.  However, in the current 
environment, Wijnands commented that it is becoming more 
difficult to convince some skeptical EU partners of the need 
for a balanced approach.   The Dutch remain concerned about 
terrorist attacks in the region, but expect most conversation 
at the GAERC to focus on Israel's relationship with the EU 
and its role in the MEPP, not Palestine. 
 
Iran 
----- 
 
¶3. (C) GAERC conclusions on Iran will be less-forthcoming 
than the Dutch wish, and will focus primarily on 
non-proliferation issues.  The GoNL wants to include language 
that draws attention to other issues, particularly human 
rights, but are doubtful that such language will be added. 
The GoNL will co-sponsor a UN resolution with Canada 
highlighting the poor human rights situation in Iran, 
assuming "at least a few" other EU countries do so as well. 
(Note:  Both Wijnands and PolOff were surprised that the FM 
did firmly commit to co-sponsoring despite what other EU 
countries decide.  However, Wijnands stated he is not 
concerned as a few other EU countries will positively decide 
to co-sponsor.  The FM may be attempting to demonstrate that 
there is some strong solidarity among at least some EU 
members on the subject of Iran's poor human rights.  End 
Note.) 
 
 
Afghanistan 
------------ 
 
¶4. (C) Wijnands stated that discussions on Afghanistan will 
focus on the on-going security situation and the new 
constitution.  While the GoNL finds a "reason for optimism" 
in the new constitution, it and other EU members remain 
concerned that there are not enough checks and balances on 
the powers of the President. 
RUSSEL