This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, AND S/ES-CR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPDC PGOV HO
SUBJECT: HONDURAN FOREIGN MINISTERS (CURRENT AND FORMER) 
SEND LETTERS TO SECRETARY POWELL 
 
Ref: State 268055 
     Tegucigalpa 1863 
 
¶1.  Honduran Foreign Minister Leonidas Rosa Bautista, under 
cover letter to the Ambassador, sent the Embassy on October 
20 two letters to Secretary Powell - one from himself in 
response to a September 18 letter from the Secretary (ref A) 
and one from former Foreign Minister Guillermo Perez-Cadalso 
Arias officially announcing his July 23 resignation (ref B). 
Post is unsure why the Foreign Ministry did not send the 
Perez-Cadalso letter earlier.  Post faxed originals to 
WHA/CEN.  Unofficial Embassy translation of the two letters 
follows. 
 
¶2. 
 
Secretary of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Honduras 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C. September 26, 2003 
 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary: 
 
I have the pleasure to confirm receipt of your kind letter 
on the 18th of this month, by means of which you 
congratulate me for my recent appointment, which I am 
thankful. 
 
Indeed, the relationship between Honduras and the United 
States has been excellent and is characterized by solidarity 
and mutual respect.  You can be sure that I share your wish 
to still fortify it, through the cooperation in subjects of 
particular interest for both countries, such as the fight 
against terrorism, drug trafficking and corruption, as well 
as obtaining a successful negotiation in the Free Trade 
Agreement between Central America and the United States. 
 
I take advantage of this first opportunity to express my 
highest and distinguished consideration. 
 
/s/ 
 
Leonidas Rosa-Bautista 
Secretary of Foreign Relations 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
Tegucigalpa, M.D.C. 22 of July of 2003 
 
 
Excellency: 
 
I have honor to acknowledge to your Excellency that in this 
date, I interposed my resignation for the position of 
Secretary of State in the Office of Foreign Affairs, to Mr. 
 
SIPDIS 
Ricardo Maduro, President of the Republic of Honduras, 
effective as of July 23. 
 
Upon saying goodbye to your Excellency, I wish to express my 
special recognition for the attentions received during the 
exercise of my position, as well as the warm demonstrations 
of friendship toward me.  I will keep the most pleasing 
memories. 
 
Upon formulating my best wishes for your personal fortune, 
Excellency, I take this opportunity to renew the testimony 
of my highest and distinguished consideration. 
 
/s/ 
 
Guillermo Perez-Cadalso Arias 
 
¶3.  End unofficial Embassy translation. 
Palmer