This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T THE HAGUE 001920 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR PM, EUR/UBI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/30/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL CD LI ML MR NG XY NL UNSC
SUBJECT: LIBERIA: DUTCH WILL CONTRIBUTE EURO 500,000 FOR 
MALI VIA ECOWAS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 219151 
 
Classified By: A/PolCouns Kami A. Witmer Reasons 1.5 (a), (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (S) Summary:  The GoNL plans to contribute euro 500,000 
via ECOWAS to Mali to support Mali's military contribution to 
an ECOWAS force in Liberia.  Such financial support will be 
dependent upon a "believable arrangement" that Taylor will 
leave country and will not be absolved of his war crimes 
indictment from the Special Court for Sierra Leone.  The 
Dutch are also prepared to donate euro 500,000 for 
humanitarian assistance via UN and/or established 
humanitarian organizations once stability is reached.  Dutch 
military support is unlikely.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (S) PolOff and DATT delivered reftel to MFA Marc 
Bentinck, MFA Division head for Conflict Prevention, Peace 
Operations, and Military and Civil Cooperation, and R. van 
der Veen, Deputy Director for West Africa.  Bentinck stated 
the Government of Mali recently approached the GoNL, asking 
for financial support of Mali's military contribution to an 
ECOWAS mission.  The GoNL is prepared to donate euro 500,000 
to fulfill this request.  However, the Dutch insist that the 
contribution go through ECOWAS.  To date, the GoNL has 
not/not received a formal request from ECOWAS.  Upon receipt 
of such request, the Dutch could provide funding within a 
matter of days.  Van der Veen said that the GoNL will attach 
two conditions to its contribution.  Taylor must leave, or 
there must be a "believable arrangement" that he will depart 
country.  Secondly, his departure cannot include any 
arrangement that would negate his indictment for war crimes 
under the Special Court for Sierra Leone. 
 
¶3.  (S) Due to participation in other overseas military 
operations and defense budget cuts, Bentinck does not 
anticipate a GoNL military contribution to an international 
coalition of peacekeeping forces in Liberia at this time. 
(Note:  Post concurs with this assessment; military support 
from the Dutch is unlikely.)  He will, nevertheless, discuss 
options within the GoNL.  Bentinck was open to the DATT's 
suggestion to at least consider providing airlift support on 
an ad-hoc basis in the future. 
 
¶4.  (S) The Dutch have set aside euro 500,000 for 
humanitarian assistance for Liberia.  It is prepared to 
contribute such funds via UN or other established 
humanitarian agencies once the situation on the ground is 
stable.  Van der Veen commented that additional financial 
assistance might be possible in the future. 
RUSSEL