This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002220 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/03/2013 
TAGS: KNNP PARM PREL MNUC IR NL IAEA
SUBJECT: IAEA/IRAN: DUTCH MFA ON IAEA BOG NONCOMPLIANCE 
RESOLUTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 249878 
 
     ¶B. THE HAGUE 2173 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY POLITICAL COUNSELOR MARY DALY FOR REASONS 
1.5 (B AND D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  Poloffs delivered ref A demarche to Dutch 
MFA Nonproliferation Chief Paul Wilke on September 3.  The 
Dutch agree that a noncompliance resolution on Iran is 
warranted, but believe it may have to wait for Dir. 
ElBaradei's final report in November.  According to Wilke 
there is "no unity" within the EU on Iran, and it will be 
difficult to gain consensus for a resolution at this time. 
Wilke said MFA was awaiting the results of September 5-6 EU 
FM's Gymnich meeting, as well as PM Balkenende's and FM de 
Hoop Scheffer's September 3 meetings in Washington.  Wilke 
noted that a high-level Iranian official had recently told 
the GONL that Iran enjoyed no benefits under the NPT, and 
that pushing for a resolution in the present climate may 
result in even less Iranian cooperation.  Wilke suggested a 
two-pronged approach of getting Iran to sign up to an 
Additional Protocol and agreeing to full cooperation with the 
IAEA, and also looking to move Iran away from elements of 
their program that will lead to a breakout capability. 
Despite his own view that a noncompliance resolution is not 
achievable at this time, Wilke said if the Dutch saw the 
possibility of a resolution at the September BOG meeting, 
they would unquestionably support it.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Poloffs made ref A points to Dutch MFA 
Nonproliferation Chief Paul Wilke on September 3.  Wilke 
reiterated his previous comments (ref B) that the Dutch agree 
with U.S. arguments in support of a noncompliance resolution 
on Iran, and that there is no argument about the seriousness 
of the contents of the latest ElBaradei report. 
Nevertheless, Wilke said that tactically it might be 
advisable to wait until November to push for a resolution so 
as to coincide with Dir. ElBaradei's final report.  He saw no 
unity in the EU on Iran, and said it would be difficult to 
gain consensus at this time.  Wilke noted that Iran will be 
on the agenda at the upcoming September 5-6 EU FMs Gymnich 
meeting and said the MFA was looking to the results of that 
meeting as well as PM Balkenende and FM de Hoop Scheffer's 
meetings in Washington that day to determine next steps. 
 
¶3. (C)  Further to his comments on the lack of unity in EU on 
Iran, Wilke said the Germans opposed a noncompliance 
resolution at this time.  He suggested that Germany might 
conclude that even if Iran has nuclear weapon capability, it 
still may not be an immediate threat to Europe and NATO.  He 
underlined that it is precisely due to these divergences in 
perspective that more time is needed to gain support for a 
resolution.  Concerning the Iranians, Wilke said that Iranian 
MFA Deputy Director General for International and Political 
Affairs Ali Asghar Soltanieh had recently told Dutch MFA 
Deputy Political Director Herman Schaper that Iran enjoyed no 
benefits under the NPT.  Wilke said that pushing for a 
resolution in the present climate may cause Iran to become 
less cooperative with IAEA, possibly giving them an excuse to 
withdraw from the NPT altogether.  In Wilke's view, a 
two-pronged approach is necessary in dealing with Iran: 
obtaining Iranian accession to an Additional Protocol and 
providing full cooperation with the IAEA, and also 
international efforts to move Iran away from those elements 
of its program that will lead it to a breakout capability. 
Despite the lack of unity in the EU and his own view that a 
noncompliance resolution was not achievable at this time, 
Wilke reiterated that if the Dutch saw a possibility for 
gaining a noncompliance resolution, they would "jump on it." 
SOBEL