This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HO CHI MINH CITY 001059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PRM A/S DEWEY; EAP/BCLTV; DRL/IRF 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PHUM PGOV PREL PINS SOCI KIRF VM CB RELFREE HUMANR ETMIN
SUBJECT: A/S DEWEY IN VIETNAM CENTRAL HIGHLANDS:  LAM DONG 
PROVINCE 
 
REF:  A)  HCMC 0833   B) HCMC 0842 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  In recent meetings with Lam Dong provincial 
authorities,  PRM Assistant Secretary Dewey expressed strong U.S. 
concern about the treatment of ethnic minorities and a lack of 
religious freedom for unregistered Protestant house churches.  Lam 
Dong officials stressed that the practice of Christianity and 
Buddhism is open and widespread, and said they were considering 
measures to accelerate the pace of church registrations.  In the 
meantime, house churches would be allowed to operate while their 
paperwork was being completed.  So far, Lam Dong has registered 12 
Protestant churches under the umbrella of the GVN-recognized 
Southern Evangelical Church of Vietnam (SECV).  Another 168 house 
churches are in the process of applying for registration.  It is 
unclear how many other churches do not wish to apply at this time. 
Provincial officials emphasized poverty as the biggest threat to 
the welfare of ethnic minorities and asked for assistance in 
attracting U.S. investments.  On the whole, Lam Dong province 
seems to represent a slightly more progressive model of religious 
tolerance in the Central Highlands, although there are continuing 
reports of problems.  PRM Assistant Secretary Dewey was 
accompanied by DCM/Charge, HCMC Acting CG, Refugee Resettlement 
Section chief, and EAP/BCLTV Vietnam Desk Officer.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  In a meeting with Lam Dong Provincial People's Committee 
Chairman Phan Thien, A/S Dewey expressed his pleasure at returning 
to Dalat for the first time in nearly 40 years, setting a cordial 
tone for the discussion that followed.  Mr. Thien provided a 
relatively positive overview of current conditions in the 
province, despite its underdeveloped economy.  He said the 
introduction of coffee as a cash crop had initially been a great 
boon for ethnic minorities.  During the period of rising coffee 
prices a few years ago, as many as 140,000 hectares of land had 
been planted with coffee and many towns and villages had bought a 
lot of machinery and equipment to support coffee farming. 
However, the more recent downturn in coffee prices had affected 
ethnic minority groups badly.  Their income from coffee crops had 
declined dramatically, and they had heavy debts still to pay from 
the equipment purchases of previous years.  He hoped that a 
gradual rise again in coffee prices might help alleviate the 
situation.  He also said the province was trying to build more 
roads this year and would strive to extend the electrical network 
to the last three villages still without electricity. 
 
¶3.  (U)  On the issue of religious freedom, Mr. Thien stated 
directly that Vietnam in general -- and Lam Dong province in 
particular -- enjoy freedom of religion.  He called the practice 
of Catholicism and Buddhism "very good now," noting there are 
numerous new churches and pagodas to be seen on the road to Dalat. 
He claimed there is no town in the province where religion is a 
problem.  Chairman Thien then went on to state very matter-of- 
factly that he was sure, however, that we wanted to know about 
policies toward Protestants.  He started by noting that there are 
over 65,000 Protestants in the province, an increase since pre- 
1975 days, and that many of the Protestants are residents of 
ethnic minority villages. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Mr. Thien expressed concern that many believers seek to 
use the cover of religion for what is actually political activity, 
citing the Dega group in particular.  A/S Dewey responded that he 
had spoken with many sincere believers on this trip, e.g., in 
Pleiku (ref B), who were also concerned about staying away from 
such political activity.  A/S Dewey said clearly that the USG 
recognizes the territorial integrity of Vietnam and does not 
support the Dega movement or its calls for a separate state. 
However, Mr. Dewey said the U.S. believes the Dega political group 
to be relatively small, and that the vast majority of Protestant 
believers simply want to practice their faith.  It is essential 
that believers be allowed to gather together for religious 
purposes. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Chairman Thien indicated he understood this distinction 
and noted there are now 12 Protestant churches officially 
recognized in Lam Dong Province.  Religious Affairs Committee 
(CRA) director Bang noted that there are a total of 180 Protestant 
churches in Lam Dong.  Concerning the question of the other 168 
churches gaining recognition, Mr. Bang emphasized the role of the 
SECV in establishing charters for Protestant churches as a first 
step.  After that, the CRA would work with the SECV to recognize 
additional churches.  Mr. Bang also raised the need to obtain 
funding in order to build churches for these congregations.  He 
said that as churches established charters through the SECV and 
constructed church buildings, they could become recognized fairly 
quickly.  In response, A/S Dewey emphasized that a church is more 
than just a building; it is also a community.  The important issue 
is to allow for freedom of assembly -- the ability to gather 
together, whether in a church or a house.  Provincial leaders 
pointed out their priority is helping groups build churches and to 
gain formal recognition, but in the meantime, they would permit 
congregations to gather in smaller groups in houses to worship 
together. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) A/S Dewey asked for confirmation that the 168 
unrecognized but known Protestant churches can gather without 
interference, even in houses.  CRA director Bang confirmed this to 
be the case.  Mr. Bang said it was "important to take care of the 
spiritual needs of the people," as well as their material needs. 
He also stated that the CRA would try to "facilitate" the 
registration process, so the 168 unregistered churches could 
register in a relatively short time.  When A/S Dewey made a point 
of stating that the USG does not support the Dega movement, Mr. 
Bang responded that his committee "understands the difference" and 
"tries to distinguish" between those in the Dega movement with a 
political agenda and those who are "true believers."  A/S Dewey 
welcomed this news and said he hoped Consulate General staff would 
be able to follow up in the near future to see some house churches 
in action. 
 
¶7.  (U)  In his meetings with provincial officials, A/S Dewey 
encouraged them to improve investment and foreign development 
assistance opportunities in the province.  Having heard their 
comments about the lower level of economic development in Lam 
Dong, he hoped the province would make it easier for U.S. 
companies to participate in economic development.  Chairman Thien 
noted that Lam Dong is far away from the economic powerhouse of Ho 
Chi Minh City.  It has a limited road network, a small airport and 
no direct access to the sea.  But the provincial capital of Dalat, 
which already attracts domestic and some foreign tourists, is 
planning to upgrade the airport to receive international flights. 
Authorities are hopeful that this will help Dalat develop into a 
major tourist center, and felt there may be a role to play for 
American companies in developing the tourism and hospitality 
industry.  A/S Dewey also urged provincial leaders to consider 
foreign assistance projects that USAID could assist with, and said 
he hoped the Embassy would be permitted to follow up on this 
subject. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  On a visit later in the day to the village of Suoi Tong 
A, A/S Dewey and his group saw close-up the slowly improving, 
though still underdeveloped, state of the countryside.  Most of 
Suoi Tong A had electricity; a school building had been recently 
built; and most of the houses were of reasonably solid wood and 
stone construction.  The fields surrounding the village were all 
planted and seemed to be filled with thriving crops.  In stops at 
two different houses, A/S Dewey heard from the residents about 
conditions in their village.  While life is still very hard, they 
said that the building of roads and the electrification of the 
village have improved conditions in the past few years.  Both 
Catholics and Protestants live in Suoi Tong A, but no one we spoke 
with complained of any concerted effort to discourage them from 
practicing their religion.  While there were no churches in the 
village itself, Catholics are able to attend a church down the 
main road a few kilometers.  Protestants informed us that they 
were able to gather among themselves informally without 
interference.  There are about eight such "house churches."  They 
have been told they can operate in small groups until a larger 
church is built and registered, when they will be expected to 
consolidate and attend that church. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  One light moment came during a short stop en route to 
Suoi Thong A at an ethnic minority handicraft shop.  A/S Dewey and 
his group browsed through the handicrafts and purchased several 
items such as bags and silk fabrics.  As A/S Dewey attempted to 
bargain with the shop lady to lower the price a little bit, she 
shook her head, pointed to the Catholic church across the road, 
and said with a gentle smile, "God sets the prices."  It turned 
out the shop is owned and run by the Catholic church to raise 
money for its ethnic minority congregation. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Comment:  Of the three provinces visited by A/S Dewey 
on his trip through the Central Highlands, Lam Dong seemed to 
present the most forward-looking and progressive image.  The 
provincial authorities genuinely seem to be trying to improve 
conditions for the ethnic minority population through economic 
development.  The over-reliance on coffee as a new cash crop may 
have backfired due to the drop in the world market price (caused 
in no small part by Vietnam's additional supply), but prices have 
recovered off of their lows.  Road building and rural 
electrification seem to have reached even the smaller and more 
remote villages, increasing access to markets and improving their 
living conditions.  The growth of the tourism industry in Dalat 
should also spur economic development.  Nonetheless, Lam Dong 
remains a relatively poor, underdeveloped province and its ethnic 
minority groups remain on the lower end of the economic and social 
spectrum within the province. 
¶11.  (SBU) In the area of religious practice, Lam Dong provincial 
officials seemed more willing to discuss the issue, with less 
defensiveness and with some apparent plan in mind for further 
registration of churches.  On the drive into Dalat from 
neighboring Dak Lak province, A/S Dewey observed what appeared to 
be a number of recently constructed Catholic churches in several 
villages along the highway.  The mindset of provincial leaders 
that Protestant congregations must build "real" churches as a pre- 
condition for being recognized is a stumbling block, both 
physically and philosophically.  While the apparent tolerance of 
Protestants gathering in houses until "real" churches can be built 
and registered is a welcome sign, we must point out that the 
majority of Suoi Tong A's Protestants are affiliated with the GVN- 
recognized SECV anyway.  The Consulate General will follow up with 
additional visits, and to verify progress toward registering at 
least some of the 168 identified but unrecognized house churches 
who wish to register. 
 
¶12.  (U)  This cable was not cleared by A/S Dewey before his 
departure. 
 
YAMAUCHI