This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 008136 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR NEA AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL KPAL KWBG JO UNRWA
SUBJECT: UNRWA LAUNCHES 2004 EMERGENCY APPEAL FOR WEST BANK 
AND GAZA, WARNS FUNDING NEEDS WILL INCREASE DUE TO 
SEPARATION BARRIER 
 
¶1.  (U) UNRWA Commissioner General Peter Hansen launched the 
agency's 2004 emergency appeal for the West Bank and Gaza in 
separate donor briefings in Amman and Jerusalem on December 
11 and 12.  The USD 196 million appeal focuses on temporary 
employment (USD 62 million) and food security programs (USD 
55.6 million), and is the seventh emergency appeal issued by 
UNRWA since September 2000.  The appeal also requests USD 
32.9 million to cover shelter repair and reconstruction 
costs, including USD 30.6 million to rebuild 1,100 demolished 
refugee shelters in Gaza alone, where housing demolitions 
have averaged 73 per month.  The appeal is available on 
http://www.un.org/unrwa/emergency/7Appeal. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Characterizing the 2004 appeal as "extremely modest 
and minimalist," Hansen told donors UNRWA had prioritized 
previous emergency programs in order to reduce costs from 
¶2003.  For example, UNWRA reduced its emergency food parcels 
to provide only 40 percent of refugees' daily nutritional 
needs, down from the 60 percent provided in emergency food 
parcels distributed under previous appeals.  Hansen warned 
that poor donor response could force UNRWA to reduce 
emergency programs still further, citing as an example the 
West Bank's mobile clinic program that will end on December 
31 if new funds are not quickly pledged.  (In a separate 
December 4 meeting, West Bank Deputy Director Guy Siri told 
refcoord that poor donor response to the 2003 appeals had 
left UNRWA without its customary three-month "cushion," a 
reserve of funds that could be programmed to ensure 
continuation of essential services in the first months of a 
new appeal.  Only services already contracted under the 2003 
appeal, e.g. the Operations Support Officer program, the 
first 2004 food distribution and some temporary employment 
programs, will continue after December 31.) 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In the new appeal, UNRWA reports that 88,284 
Palestinian refugees in the northern West Bank already have 
been affected by the separation barrier while another 70,000 
refugees in the greater Jerusalem area will be affected by 
the barrier's "Jerusalem envelope."  UNRWA West Bank Director 
Anders Fange told refcoord December 4 that UNRWA has just 
begun quantifying the impact of the barrier on UNRWA 
operations, planning how staff and resources could be 
redirected to provide services in areas now completely cut 
off from UNRWA services.  Fange predicted that hospital 
access could be the most difficult problem for the agency, as 
UNRWA's Qalqiliya hospital is now completely encircled by the 
barrier and the Augusta Victoria hospital in East Jerusalem 
(UNRWA's primary contractor) will be inaccessible to West 
Bank residents after completion of the "Jerusalem envelope." 
Hansen confirmed to donors that the 2004 appeal does not 
contain new programs or additional service delivery costs 
required to meet refugees' basic needs in areas affected by 
the barrier.  He said the agency plans to issue an addendum 
to the emergency appeal to cover new barrier-related programs 
and costs "within the next three months."  Hansen added that 
he was unable to preview these expected costs, as he had just 
returned from several weeks of travels abroad and had not yet 
been briefed on the West Bank field's calculations to-date. 
GNEHM