This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 KATHMANDU 002505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SEPT FOR INR/R, R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA, SA/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR NP
SUBJECT: Media Reaction: U.S. ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF 
STATE CHRISTINA ROCCA'S VISIT TO NEPAL 
 
Summary: Nepali media followed the visit of U.S. 
Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs Christina 
 
SIPDIS 
Rocca with keen interest.  Her meetings with the king, 
government officials and political leaders were covered 
with top priority.  While her meeting with army 
officials at the Royal Nepal Army headquarters was 
viewed positively as an evidence of the continuation of 
military support to fight the Maoists by some, others 
expressed skepticism over America's increasing 
"interests" in Nepal.  The media also gave emphasis to 
Rocca's "exclusive" visit to Nepal in South Asia. 
Opinions and editorials were largely positive. 
 
¶1.  EDITORIALS/OPINIONS 
 
-- Editorial in "The Rising Nepal, " (Government-owned, 
E/D, 12/18): "...The four-day visit by the high-ranking 
U.S. official is expected to help the U.S. government 
garner an update on the recent developments in Nepal. 
Nepalese officials would do well to seize the 
opportunity to explain to the Americans its strategies 
and plans in meeting the challenges confronting the 
nation and seek assistance where relevant." 
 
-- Editorial in "Spotlight," (Rightist, E/W, 12/18): 
"...U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia 
Christina Rocca renews American support to Nepal in its 
war against terrorism".. Although the U.S. is far away 
from Nepal, the sincere support given by the world's 
only super power to Nepal has immense importance to 
limit the damage of terrorism".. But the U.S. pressure 
on India, whose sincere support is essential to Nepal's 
quest for peace by containing the Maoists and creating 
conducive situation to hold elections, is yet to be 
seen.... Whether one likes it or not, the U.S. has 
reaffirmed its continuous support for Nepal's effort to 
quell the Maoist terrorism as a part of its global war 
against terrorism.  Rocca's statement and support to 
Nepal's cause once again proves that the U.S. is a 
reliable partner, which has only the intention of 
seeing the long-term security and prosperity of Nepal. 
 
-- Editorial in "Annapurna Post," (Pro-India, V/D, 
12/19): "...Rocca's visit proves that America attaches 
special concerns for Nepal".. Her visit makes it evident 
that America wants sustained peace and an efficient 
system [in Nepal]..." 
 
-- Op-ed in "Nepali Times," (Centrist, E/W, 12/19): 
""false premises, Did Christina Rocca figure out what 
is really going on in Nepal?".. By the time she leaves 
on Friday, it is unlikely that she will have learned 
much more than what she has already been told by the 
embassy here". All Christina Rocca needs to take back 
home to correct her government's policies towards Nepal 
is an appreciation of the role of democracy in this 
country." 
 
-- Op-ed in "The Rising Nepal," (Government-owned, E/D, 
12/19): "Rocca's visit: Fruitful for Nepal: .". In view 
of the remarkable contribution made by the U.S. 
government in the social and economic development, the 
USA can play an important role to resolve the present 
crisis".. The U.S. assistance in the development of 
rural areas will be fruitful in this context". It is 
expected that the fact-finding mission of Rocca will be 
fruitful to understand Nepal more closely and help 
resolve problems." 
 
-- "Desh Prem," (Centrist, V/W, 12/18): "...Christina 
Rocca has been busy meeting with leaders of various 
political parties since her arrival at Tribhuvan 
International Airport.  Her meetings were focused on 
Nepal's internal political affairs.  British special 
envoy Jeffrey James was in the country just a few days 
ago [with similar activities].  This shows that 
foreigners are 
meddling in Nepal's internal business." 
 
-- Op-ed in "The Rising Nepal," (Government-owned, E/D, 
12/22): "". Rocca Visit: What all should learn: ". Her 
repeated appeals that all the constitutional forces 
should work together to resolve the present crisis 
faced by the nation should not go unheeded.  It must be 
remembered this can't be done by pointing fingers at 
one another, especially not by blaming the very 
institution [monarchy] that has guided the nation 
through thick and thin for more than two centuries and 
which has the biggest stake in the well-being of the 
nation than anyone else. " 
 
-- "Drishti," (Leftist, V/W, 12/23): "". Media persons, 
keen to learn what impact Rocca's visit might have on 
Nepal, were disappointed to find that she also 
supported 'Asojtantra' [king's October 4, 2002 move]. 
It is understood that Rocca's intention is to 'fish in 
muddy water' amidst the political chaos of Nepal." 
 
¶2. REPORTS 
 
-- "Tarun," (Pro-Nepali Congress Democratic, V/W, 
12/22): "".. Donors unhappy with King and Army: Donors 
have indicated that they may cut off the financial 
assistance if the situation in Nepal continues to be 
like this".. The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for 
South Asian Region, Christina Rocca, has returned 
dissatisfied with the role of the king, army and 
political parties.  Referring to the violations of 
human rights by the army, Rocca openly said that if the 
situation did not improve it would have [negative] 
effects on the American military assistance to Nepal." 
 
-- "The Kathmandu Post," (Centrist, E/D, 12/21): "Rocca 
mum over US support to parties". The U.S. Assistant 
Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs, Christina 
 
SIPDIS 
Rocca, denied to hand out any assurance of U.S. 
political support to the political parties both during 
her separate meetings with party representatives and at 
the joint meeting held at the residence of the U.S. 
ambassador.  Sources in the party said Rocca was more 
critical of the way political parties were functioning 
rather than pledging any U.S. support to them in their 
bid to restore the derailed constitutional and 
political process.  'How do you all expect to weather 
the political crisis when your parties are suffering 
from intra-party squabbling and mismanagement?' Rocca 
asked six leaders representing the NC, CPN-UML and 
Rastriya Prajatantra Party (RPP).  Saying that the 
tryst with Rocca was more an embarrassment than a 
prelude to any breakthrough in conflict with the 
constitutional monarch, party sources revealed that the 
U.S. visitor advised against any confrontation with the 
king 'since the common enemy is the CPN-Maoist.'" 
 
-- "Annapurna Post," (Pro-India, V/D, 12/20): "". U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia Christina 
Rocca, during her visit to Nepal, gave assurances to 
political party leaders that she would report to the 
U.S. Government and Senate about the current human 
rights situation and setback in democratic exercises in 
Nepal." 
 
-- "Nepal Samacharpatra," (Centrist, V/D, 12/19): 
"...U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian 
Affairs Christina Rocca today visited several health 
programs sponsored by the U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID) in collaboration with the 
government of Nepal." 
 
-- "Nepali Patra," (Rightist, V/W, 12/19): "". Political 
parties have always been complaining to the U.S. that 
democracy is being eradicated in Nepal.  Christina 
Rocca's visit will remove all this confusion, as she 
clearly understood from the king that he and the 
government were fully committed to democracy and human 
rights." 
 
-- "The Kathmandu Post," (Centrist, E/D, 12/19) and 
"Kantipur," (Centrist, V/D, 12/19): "...On the third day 
of her Nepal visit, Christina Rocca, the U.S. Assistant 
Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs, has said 
 
SIPDIS 
that concerned forces have realized the seriousness of 
the threat posed by the Maoist insurgency.  She 
stressed that the U.S. was for democracy and 
preser 
vation of human rights in Nepal.  'Democracy is 
important and we like to see it thriving,' she said. 
She said that the U.S. would continue extending support 
to the Royal Nepal Army, which it has been doing for 
the past one year.  'There's some optimism within the 
RNA,' she said.  Rocca also said that she raised the 
rights issues very strongly with the government and has 
received full assurances of improvement.  'Human rights 
abuses are unacceptable. The rights awareness program 
initiated within the RNA will continue,' she said".. 
However, Rocca was against the idea of using aid-cut as 
a political tool to pressurize the king or the 
government. 'Our aid is for the poor people of this 
country, not in the support of any government,' she 
said." 
 
-- "The Himalayan Times," (Pro-India, E/D, 12/19): 
"...All democratic forces in Nepal understood the major 
threat the country was facing and the need to work 
together to deal with the threat, the visiting U.S. 
assistant secretary of state for South Asian affairs, 
Christina Rocca, said when asked about differences she 
saw in the political situation since her last visit a 
year ago.  Rocca regretted the current 'impasse' 
between the monarch and the agitating parties, but 
underlined the need for 'some kind of reconciliation.' 
She hastened to add this was something for the Nepali 
people themselves to decide.  'Democracy is a very 
important element in Nepal and we want to see it put 
back on track,' she said.  She reaffirmed Washington's 
continued support to Nepal to overcome the present 
period of hardship.  She also urged the constitutional 
forces to 'come together' and 'find a way out of the 
challenges facing the country.'  'The U.S. will 
continue to provide military assistance,' she said, 
satisfied with the army's campaign against terrorism." 
 
-- "The Rising Nepal," (Government-owned, E/D, 12/19): 
"...Rocca said that it is 'critical' for all the 
constitutional parties of Nepal to come together to 
meet the biggest threat facing the country.  'All sides 
should reach some sort of consensus to deal with the 
main threat,' she said".. Both Rocca and U.S. Ambassador 
Michael E. Malinowski said that the major portion of 
the U.S. aid went for 'social causes' in Nepal".." 
 
-- "Spacetime," (Centrist, V/D, 12/19): ""after meeting 
Rocca, former foreign minister Ram Saran Mahat said 
that America was concerned about the Maoist problem and 
believed that the political bickering had to end to 
resolve the problem".. According to Mahat, Rocca said 
that the situation in Nepal had further deteriorated 
since last year and would present a report on this to 
her government.  Rocca met with Nepali Congress general 
secretary Sushil Koirala and Mahat, CPN-UML general 
 
SIPDIS 
secretary Madhav Kumar Nepal and foreign department 
 
SIPDIS 
chief Jhalnath Khanal..." 
 
-- "Rajdhani," (Centrist, V/D, 12/19): "...Rocca said 
that violations of human rights could affect the U.S. 
assistance to Nepal, while talking to journalists.". 
Citing security reasons, Rocca met with party leaders 
at the American ambassador's residence in Kamaladi." 
 
-- "The Kathmandu Post," (Centrist, E/D, 12/18): 
"...Christina Rocca, the U.S. Assistant Secretary of 
State for South Asian Affairs, has raised the issue of 
deployment of the Royal Nepalese Army personnel in 
Iraq, U.S. Embassy officials revealed here today.  'The 
U.S. government has asked many friendly countries some 
months back to send their troops to Iraq and this is 
nothing new,' said Constance C. Jones, the Public 
Affairs Officer of the U.S. Embassy.  Responding to a 
question whether Rocca raised the issue with the 
government and the RNA, Jones said, 'This could have 
been raised though it was not on the formal agenda.' 
The government's response was not immediately known." 
 
-- "Kantipur," (Centrist, V/D, 12/18): "... According to 
American Embassy's spokesperson Constance C. Jones, 
Rocca inquired about the human rights situation with 
army officials.  To this, 
the officials said that the 
army was clear on human rights and was investigating 
and taking actions against those accused of human 
rights violations, said RNA spokesperson Deepak 
Gurung." 
 
-- "Rajdhani," (Centrist, V/D, 12/18): "". 'Rocca was 
satisfied with the RNA's initiatives to protect human 
rights, investigations and actions against the 
abusers,' said high-level army sources.  'She is happy 
with us,' said officials." 
 
-- "The Himalayan Times," (Pro-India, E/D, 12/18): 
"...The Royal Nepalese Army today requested Washington to 
provide additional military hardware and other 
assistance to target the command and control system of 
the Maoists.  The request came following a briefing to 
the visiting United States Assistant Secretary of State 
for South Asian Affairs, Christina Rocca, on the 
overall security situation. 'She was briefed on the 
current needs of the army in quelling the eight-year- 
old Maoist insurgency,' a highly placed source at the 
Royal Nepalese Army Headquarter told.  According to the 
source, the Director General of Military Operation 
requested her for expediting the assistance on 
providing weapons and equipment." 
 
-- "Annapurna Post," (Pro-India, V/D, 12/18): "...The RNA 
has demanded added assistance from the United States 
stating that it has not achieved expected success in 
the fight against Maoists due to lack of training and 
infrastructure." 
-- "Nepal Samacharpatra," (Centrist, V/D, 12/18): "". 
the Royal Nepal Army (RNA) has drawn a serious 
attention from the U.S. by stating that some 
international organizations were supporting the 
Maoists.  'It is a matter of grave concern for us,' 
said army chief Pyar Jung Thapa to the visiting U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia, Christina 
Rocca, at the army headquarters.  During the meeting, 
Thapa also read a 15-page analytical report to Rocca, 
which included information about the army's requirement 
of arms and equipment, the status of the security 
forces' current action, and political situation.  The 
army chief said the army immediately needed arms and 
equipment, training on counter-terrorism, and some 
helicopters because of the difficult geographical 
terrains..." 
 
-- "Hindu," (Rightist, V/W, 12/18): "...Christina Rocca 
asked Prime Minister Thapa whether there was a 
favorable environment for holding elections here, as 
the political setback is quite obvious..." 
 
-- "The Rising Nepal," (Government-owned, E/D, 12/18): 
"...The King Wednesday evening granted an audience to 
visiting U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Christina 
Rocca.  She also met with the chief of army staff 
General Pyar Jung Thapa at the Royal Nepalese Army 
headquarters.  High-level army officials and U.S. 
ambassador Michael E. Malinowski were present at the 
meeting.  She is expected to meet political leaders and 
the press tomorrow." 
 
-- "Radio Nepal," (State-owned, 12/17): "...The U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia, Christina 
Rocca Tuesday called on Prime Minister Surya Bahadur 
Thapa, and said, the 'US will continue assisting Nepal 
in the fight against Maoist insurgency.'" 
 
-- "The Kathmandu Post," (Centrist, E/D, 12/17) and 
"Kantipur," (V/D, 12/17): "...The visiting Assistant 
Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs Christina 
 
SIPDIS 
Rocca today expressed concerns over increasing 
instances of human rights abuses by the security 
forces, according to ambassador-at-large Dr. Bhekh 
Bahadur Thapa.". 'The issue had to be raised,' said 
Constance C Jones, Public Affairs Officer of the 
American Embassy.  'The incidents lately are not 
ordinary.  There will be meetings with the political 
leaders on Wednesday to take stock of the situation,' 
said Jones.  According to Jones, Rocca will discuss on 
how to resolve the current situation.  'The visit is a 
fact-finding mission.' "...During her meetings on Tuesday, 
Rocca also expressed happiness over the progress on 
Bhutanese refugee problem".. She had a brief talk with 
CPN-UML general secreta 
ry Madhav Kumar Nepal at the 
airport.  Both of them arrived in Kathmandu from 
Bangkok on the same flight." 
 
-- "The Himalayan Times," (Pro-India, E/D, 12/17): 
""assistant secretary of state for South Asian Affairs, 
Christina Rocca, today arrived in Kathmandu for a four- 
day official visit.  'I am here to see what is going on 
in Nepal,' Rocca said on her arrival at the Tribhuvan 
International Airport.  She did not talk of anything in 
particular regarding the bilateral, economic and 
security cooperation.  She held discussions with Prime 
Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa and Ambassador at Large 
Bhekh Bahadur Thapa this afternoon.  'No conclusions 
can be drawn yet,' she told reporters at the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs where she met Foreign Secretary 
Madhu Raman Acharya and the Ambassador at Large.  She 
will also make an assessment of the security 
cooperation.'  Rocca voiced serious concern on the 
Human Rights situation in the country.  She was further 
interested in the government's plan to hold elections, 
officials said." 
 
-- "The Kathmandu Post," (Centrist, E/D, 12/16): "...The 
United States Assistant Secretary of State for South 
Asian Affairs Christina Rocca is arriving tomorrow on 
an exclusive four-day Nepal visit that has been termed 
a 'routine fact finding mission,' by the U.S. Embassy 
in Kathmandu".. On why was Rocca visiting only Nepal 
this time, Constance C Jones, Public Affairs Officer of 
the U.S. Embassy said, 'There is no big reason behind 
the visit.  The Assistant Secretary of State is coming 
to know the situation here.'".  Rocca is coming at a 
time when the five stirring political parties have 
announced the loth phase of their joint movement 
against regressive moves, accusing foreign powers, the 
United States among them, for siding with the monarchy 
against the parties." 
 
-- "The Himalayan Times," (Pro-India, E/D, 12/16): 
"...U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian 
Affairs Christina Rocca arrives here tomorrow on a 
four-day fact finding mission and is expected to 
discuss political and security situation in Nepal with 
government leaders and security officials"..Rocca, the 
high profile official of the Bush administration, is 
also scheduled to be briefed on the security situation 
at the Royal Nepal Army headquarters. The visit at the 
army headquarters provides Rocca an opportunity to be 
briefed on the progress made in combating terrorism 
since she visited the army headquarters a year ago. 
Rocca is also having meetings with officials of the US 
missions based in Nepal to review problems they could 
be facing regarding the prevailing security situation." 
 
-- "Taja Khabar," (Leftist, V/W, 12/15): ""according to 
sources close to the royal palace, Rocca's visit is 
aimed at pressurizing the political parties to abort 
the agitation and give warnings to ongoing fight 
between the political parties and the King.  The palace 
invited Rocca for this after the political parties went 
against its orders.  According to sources, America does 
not want to see the fight between democratic forces and 
the King.  American infiltration has increased in Nepal 
since Deuba's rule in the name of protecting democracy. 
Deuba has already become American slave.  Lately, the 
Thapa government has been able to scare Nepalese with 
the help of American weapons.". Rocca will also try to 
patch up the divided Nepali Congress, if not ask them 
to support the King in the current crisis.  She will 
also try to bring together the fighting Thapa and Rana 
camps of the Rastriya Prajatantra Party (RPP).... 
America is also planning to make Nepal a buyer for its 
weapons".. India does not like American movement in 
Nepal.  Amid all this confusion, Rocca's visit to Nepal 
is no less mysterious.  Rocca will have a special 
discussion with Nepali Congress (Democratic) president 
Sher Bahadur Deuba".. Deuba was the only supporter of 
American attack on Iraq.  He was also the person who 
opened up Nepal's strategica 
lly important places to the 
American military rulers." 
 
-- "Sanghu," (Leftist, V/W, 12/15): ""Jhe five 
agitating parties plan to demonstrate on Tuesday, 
December 16 with black flags for restoration of 
democracy, the day American Assistant Secretary of 
State for South Asia Christina Rocca is scheduled to 
arrive in Nepal.  The American government, which 
remained supportive of the monarchy after the royal 
move of October 4, 2002, has now become alone.  America 
has become isolated after other powerful countries, 
including the United Kingdom, Germany and India, called 
for the formation of an all-party government." 
 
-- "Spacetime," (Centrist, V/D, 12/13): "". U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs 
Christina Rocca is scheduled to visit Nepal next week. 
She will arrive Nepal on Tuesday to talk on bilateral 
relations and Nepal's current situation, U.S. Embassy 
spokesperson Constance Colding Jones said.  Jones said 
Rocca would meet with the king, the Prime Minister, top 
leaders of political parties, the army chief and high- 
level government officials." 
 
-- "The Himalayan Times," (Pro-India, E/D, 12/12): 
"...U.S. assistant secretary of state for South Asian 
affairs Christina Rocca is tentatively scheduled to 
visit Nepal next week on a fact-finding mission, 
diplomatic sources said.  However, the visit has not 
been confirmed yet.  'She will stay in touch with the 
political and security situation in Nepal,' the source 
said.  Rocca visited Nepal for three days in December 
last year." 
 
MALINOWSKI