This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KUWAIT 004629 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT:  KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, OCTOBER 4-7:  WMD IN IRAQ; 
ISRAEL'S ATTACK AGAINST SYRIA; U.S. TREASURY VISIT TO 
KUWAIT; BREMER'S CALL TO WRITE OFF COMPENSATION CLAIMS TO 
KUWAIT; THE VISIT OF KUWAIT'S PM TO WASHINGTON; MUSLIMS IN 
THE U.S. 
 
¶1.   News Stories: 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports on (10/7) that Prime Minister, Sheikh 
Sabah Al-Ahmed, reassured the families of the Kuwaiti 
Guantanamo detainees that he spoke to USG officials about 
this issue and that they were "understanding." 
 
All newspapers reported (10/7) that Kuwait urged the UNSC to 
condemn the attack by Israel on Syrian territories and 
requested that no such aggression be repeated.  Prime 
Minister, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed, condemned (10/6) the 
Israeli attack on Syria: "The raid constitutes a clear 
Israeli aggression against the sanctity of the territories 
of the Arab Republic of Syria and a breach of UNSC 
resolutions and international legitimacy." "Such grave 
military escalation could cause the failure of the peace 
process, would undermine efforts aimed at its success, and 
threaten stability and security in the Middle East region." 
 
All newspapers reported (10/7) that Chairman of the 
Kurdistan Democratic Party, Masoud Barazani, visited Kuwait 
yesterday.  When asked about the compensation claims he 
said:  "The compensations are a simple matter and we can 
reach an understanding in this regard."  Remaining three 
dailies quoted Barazani as saying the compensations "are not 
important" instead of "simple."  Barazani also stressed that 
the Iraqi people are not responsible for the crimes of the 
ousted regime. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Am reported on (10/6) that the Head of the Iraqi 
Governing Council, Ahmad Chalabi, said Iraq was committed to 
paying compensations to Kuwait as per UNSCR 1483.   Chalabi 
said that Amb. Bremer had not approached him about foregoing 
the compensation rights for Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. 
 
All newspapers(10/5):  Salafi movement reelects Hakem Al- 
Mutairi as Secretary General for a second three year term. 
 
All newspapers reported on (10/7) that Boeing Co. announced 
that Kuwait signed an initial foreign military sales (FMS) 
contract with the U.S. Department of Defense to purchase 16 
AH-64D Apache Longbow helicopters. 
 
All newspapers reported on (10/7) that two Kuwaiti mobile 
telecom companies were licensed to build and operate mobile 
telephone networks in southern and northern Iraq. 
 
On (10/5) all newspapers reported that Minister of Social 
Affairs and Labor, Faisal Al-Hajji, met with a delegation 
from the U.S. Department of the Treasury whereby he stressed 
that Kuwait is keen on supporting charity work inside and 
outside of Kuwait, but is against any act of terrorism. 
 
All newspapers reported (10/7) that the Ministry of Social 
Affairs also received a World Bank delegation that asked 
questions about means of preventing money laundering using 
charitable donations and measures taken to prevent terrorism 
financing.  Al-Qabas:  Informed sources revealed that 
Kuwait's five main charity organizations have 124 committee 
branches whose financial transactions are not directly 
monitored like the parent organizations and who deal with 
millions of Dinars in Charity donations, which sometimes 
exceeds the donations handled by the parent organization. 
 
Minister of Energy, Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahd, announced that 
Kuwait is considering a request from the Iraqi Governing 
Council to provide Southern Iraq with Electricity. 
All newspapers reported (10/5) that the director of external 
relations at the U.S. branch of the Student Union called on 
Kuwaiti students studying in the U.S. who are currently in 
Kuwait to register at Kuwait University in light of delays 
by the U.S. Embassy in Kuwait in granting them visas. 
 
(10/7) Al-Qabas carried a statement by Consul Sean Murphy 
clarifying that between Jan 1 and Aug 31, 2003 the Embassy 
issued 567 student visas compared to 462 student visas 
during the same period of 2002, for an increase of about 
24%.   The 567 student visas issued represents approximately 
97% of all students visa applications received during the 
period.  He added that approximately two-thirds of all visas 
(not just student visas) approved by the Embassy are issued 
the same day. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reported (10/7):  An official source at the 
Ministry of Interior revealed that some American soldiers 
are smuggling alcohol from Iraq into Kuwait. 
 
Al-Anba reported (10/7):  An informed security source 
revealed that a Saudi man suspected of being a member of Al- 
Qaeda was apprehended a week ago at the Kuwaiti border with 
Iraq and referred to State Security for investigation. 
According to the sources, the man was being chased by Iraqi 
security when he crossed the border into Kuwait. 
 
Al-Seyassa (10/6):  Kuwait's Interior Minister, Sheikh Nawaf 
al Sabah, denied reports that security officials sabotaged 
an attempt to smuggle $60 million worth of chemical weapons 
and biological warheads from Iraq. 
 
All newspapers (10/6):  A Saudi man was arrested at the 
Kuwait-Iraq Abdali border for attempting to smuggle more 
that 4876 bottles of liquor into Kuwait. An American and 
South African drivers were also apprehended for attempting 
to smuggle ten cartons of whiskey into Kuwait. 
 
Al Watan (10/5): An Indian Driver was shot and killed by a 
Kuwaiti guard outside of Camp Arifjan.  The driver was 
delivering meals from a local restaurant.  He failed to stop 
at the Kuwaiti checkpoint and did not heed the two warning 
shots fired by the Kuwaiti Guard. 
 
On October 5, Al-Watan newspaper published a paid 
advertisement by The Kuwaiti Union for Women Associations 
regarding Paul Bremer's call to write off Kuwait and Saudi 
Arabia's debts to Iraq.  They called on the National 
Assembly to respond to Bremer's call and expressed their 
fear that such a demand would become an excuse to look into 
other UN resolutions especially UN Resolution 833 on the 
demarcation of the Iraqi-Kuwaiti boarders. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶2.  "Demeaning and Bankrupt Policy" 
Islamist Dr. Yaser Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Rai Al- 
Aam (10/07):  "`We know where Iraq's WMD are'.  David Kays' 
team reported no WMD found or proof that Iraq possessed such 
weapons....  Despite this scandal, the Bush and Blair 
Administrations are still busy using the same scenario with 
other countries in the region such as Iran.  The two 
Administrations should have dealt more seriously and more 
respectfully towards the people of this region instead of 
insisting on using the same lie and deception used in the 
case of Iraq....  This signifies a preplanned Zionist agenda 
to be implemented in the region.  The Zionist mind, however, 
is incapable of creating an alternate introductory scenario 
following the unexpected beating in Iraq." 
 
¶3.  "Terrorism to Exit the Crisis" 
Liberal Editor-in-chief of Al-Anba, Bibi Al-Marzook, opined 
(10/7):  "The aggression against Syria has revealed Israel's 
ugly face.  This act reflects an arrogant, sly, and 
shameless challenge by Prime Minister Sharon.  This 
aggression proved that Israel is not determined to achieve a 
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East....  The 
U.S. must not turn a blind eye on Israel's aggression.  The 
UN should not only issue condemnation statements.  Annan 
must also call on the international community to pressure 
Sharon's government to put an end to hostile actions and to 
return to the negotiating table before terrorism spreads in 
the whole region." 
 
¶4.  "Hostile Operations" 
Liberal Dr. Ayed Al-Mana' wrote in independent Al-Watan 
(10/6):  "The Oct. 4 Haifa suicide attack did not result in 
any positive response except in the Arab and Islamic worlds. 
To Europeans and Americans, suicide attacks aimed at 
civilians are criminal acts that must be condemned and 
punished.  These attacks will make it easier for the Zionist 
government to punish thousands of Palestinians under the 
pretext of punishing resistance organizations accused of 
terrorism.  There is no doubt that the Palestinians have the 
right to resist the occupation, and the Intifada is an 
effective tool.  Many of us have hoped, however, that the 
Intifada would retain its peaceful and civil character. 
Armed resistance is a legitimate right to harass and harm 
the enemy, but the Haifa suicide attack is politically more 
damaging to the Palestinian cause and antagonizes moderate 
Jews and the West who have a great influence in the peace 
process." 
 
¶5.  "On the Fourth Anniversary of the Intifada" 
Khudair Al-Anzi wrote in independent Al-Qabas (10/4):  "The 
truth that emerged following September 11 is that the U.S. 
is led by an Administration that is not concerned about the 
interests of the American people as much as it cares for 
implementing the Zionist project in the region.  Standing up 
to such a policy following the fall of Saddam is a 
legitimate and patriotic duty.  It is crucial not to 
normalize relations with Israel and to reject all orders to 
put a stop to legitimate resistance." 
 
¶6.  "The US Treasury Delegation" 
Former MP, conservative Shiite Dr. Abdelmohsen Jamal wrote 
in independent Al-Qabas (10/6):  "The visits of the US 
Treasury delegation to monitor means of financing terrorism 
as they claim has increased lately.  I cannot understand how 
the [Kuwaiti] government could allow a foreign entity to 
monitor its work or activities despite the fact that our 
Constitution clearly states that we are an independent and 
sovereign country.  No foreign entity has the right to 
monitor or inspect the government's activities.  Moreover, 
there is no law in Kuwait that allows Americans to intervene 
in Kuwait's internal affairs.  If the Americans want to 
measure Kuwait's commitment to international resolutions 
regarding charitable work, they must refer to the UN" 
 
¶7.  "Charitable Work and the US Treasury Delegation" 
Moderate Islamist, Faisal Al-Zamel, wrote in independent Al- 
Anba (10/7):  "The visit of the US Treasury delegation to 
Kuwait and to the region has led to creating a better 
understanding of ways to maintain voluntary and charitable 
work.  When asked about Kuwait, the head of the delegation 
responded `we have no negative remarks about Kuwait'.  This, 
however, does not relieve charity organizations of the 
responsibility of exerting effort to preserve the their 
activities from misuse of funds." 
 
¶8.  "Bremer's Statement" 
Liberal Iqbal Al-Ahamd wrote in independent Al-Qabas (10/4): 
"In light of the distinguished relations between Kuwait and 
the U.S., Ambassador Bremer's calls to write off Kuwait's 
compensations to belittle the Kuwaiti government and its 
people.  His remarks call can only be described as an 
attempt to instigate sedition among friends because such a 
request will only cause a crisis between the two 
governments, especially in light of the fact that the 
Kuwaiti government cannot ignore the reaction of the Kuwaiti 
street." 
 
¶9.  "To Bremer with Regards" 
Liberal Talal Al-Arab wrote in independent Al-Qabas (10/4): 
"Bremer has asked Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to write off their 
debts to Iraq.  This is not acceptable at all, because 
Kuwait's demands for compensations are legitimate and have 
been approved by the UN.  Moreover, it is not Bremer's right 
to interfere in Kuwait's affairs....  We fear that Bremer 
may one day ask Kuwait to redraw its boarders with Iraq and 
bring the region back to square one." 
 
¶10.  "The Historic Mission" 
Faisal Al-Barjes wrote in independent Al-Qabas (10/7):  "The 
visit of Shaikh Sabah Al-Ahamd to Washington and Britain and 
his meetings with Bush and Blair to discuss regional and 
international issues and to convey the views of Saudi 
Arabia, Iran, and Syria is considered a historic mission for 
Kuwait.  We congratulate ourselves as Kuwaiti citizens for 
the success of Shaikh Sabah's visit, especially at this 
critical time." 
 
¶11.  "Washington and the Distorted Image" 
Moderate Islamist Faisal Al-Zamel wrote in independent Al- 
Anba (10/6):  "In its war against terrorism, Washington no 
longer seems capable of differentiating between friends and 
enemies.  In its eyes, everyone is a suspect.  Last week, 
American authorities apprehended the Chairman of the U.S. 
American Islamic Council, Dr. Abdul Rahman Al-Amoudi.  Al- 
Amoudi was a guest at the White House on several occasions. 
The September 11 attacks have generated a society that is 
unwilling to listen to other people's opinion.  We hope that 
Washington will become aware of this deterioration and begin 
to ask itself why people hate Americans and what has to be 
done to change America's image." 
 
JONES