This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP AND INL 
CDR PACOM FOR FPA 
DEA FOR OF, OFF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/05/2013 
TAGS: SNAR BM
SUBJECT: OPIUM LARGELY GONE, FARMERS MAY STARVE IN NORTHERN 
SHAN STATE 
 
REF: 2002 UNVIE 0285 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez.  Reason: 1.5 (d). 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: After a month-long assessment, a UNODC 
mission told diplomats April 10 that "opium production in 
Burma was plainly ending."  Northern Shan State, including 
areas controlled by cease-fire groups like the Kokang 
Chinese, was essentially clear of opium production.  However, 
farmers were paying the price for eradication.  Normally 
subsisting on incomes of less than $200/year, farmers and 
their families may starve this year. End Summary. 
 
"The Era of Opium Cultivation in Burma is Ending" 
 
¶2. (U) After a month-long assessment of the Wa Alternative 
Development Project in northeast Shan State, UNODC's 
assessment mission told diplomats, representatives of UN 
agencies, and INGOs April 10 that "the era of opium 
cultivation in Burma is plainly ending."  According to the 
mission, opium cultivation had largely ended in northern Shan 
State.  This was true even in cease-fire areas that were 
previously centers of production.  Shan State Special Region 
1 in the Kokang, in particular, is completely clear of opium. 
 According to the assessment mission, cultivation continues 
in the territories controlled by the United Wa State Army, 
but even there cultivators are aware of the pending deadline 
fixed by the Wa authorities.  By the end of the 2004/05 
growing season, the Wa-controlled Special Region 2 is also 
scheduled to be opium-free. 
 
People May Starve 
 
¶3. (U) The downside of these developments, however, is a 
potential humanitarian catastrophe among the farmers 
dependent on growing opium for their income.  According to 
the mission, farmers in northern and eastern Shan State are 
already poor.  Yearly incomes run about $200/year, malaria is 
endemic, and child mortality rates (i.e., the number of 
children that die before the age of five) may run as high as 
35 percent, according to surveys done by INGOs.  Most 
critically, the region is deficit in food.  Farmers in the 
region have annually produced food sufficient to feed their 
families for only four to five months each year.  For the 
balance of the year, they fed their families with income from 
opium. 
 
¶4. (U) That income has now disappeared, and farmers have 
begun to move seeking work.  Wages, in turn, have collapsed. 
According to the mission, the wage for day labor in the 
Kokang has dropped sixty percent in recent months from 
approximately 10 Chinese yuan per day to only 4 yuan now (the 
equivalent of about 50 cents).  Meanwhile, some families have 
begun mortgaging property to meet current expenses; others 
have moved to larger cities like Kutkai, Lashio, and Laukai 
to beg.  Still others have begun to economize on 
non-essential expenditures, like education.  According to the 
mission, primary school attendance in the region has dropped 
60 percent in 2003. 
 
¶5. (U) The mission anticipates that this situation will grow 
rapidly worse both this year and in years to come.  Farmers 
in Shan State have not yet even begun to plant the monsoon 
rice crop, which will not be harvested until October. Between 
now and then, families will be left to cope on the basis of 
whatever resources they can find.  The crisis will also 
almost certainly expand as other regions go out of opium. 
The population of the Kokang region is only 200,000; the 
population of the Wa territories is 600,000 -- three times as 
large.  As those territories end opium production, the 
problems now evident in the Kokang and other areas of 
northern Shan State could multiply. 
 
 
Recommended Response 
 
¶6. (U) UNODC's assessment mission said that it is still 
working out the details of a proposed response, but 
anticipated that the cost of dealing with the consequences of 
opium eradication would overwhelm the resources of the GOB 
and of the cease-fire groups.  The entire budget of the 
Myanmar National Democratic Alliance Army, which ruled in the 
Kokang, was only 8 million yuan (i.e.; $1 million) per year. 
Similarly, while the Government of Burma claimed to have 
pumped over 40 billion kyat (about USD 40 million) in to the 
border regions over the past 14 years, this latest crisis was 
only one of several facing it.  Both might try to provide 
relief, but neither would be able to provide assistance on 
the scale required. 
 
¶7. (U) The mission said that it would recommend basically two 
programs: a 2-year program of humanitarian assistance and a 
15-year program of alternative development assistance that 
built on the experience gathered from the Wa Alternative 
Development Program.  It had not yet put a dollar value on 
the required assistance for either, but had at least 
developed a package of 3 proposed interventions for the 
emergency program and 20 proposed interventions for the first 
five years of the 15-year program.  Once complete, the 
15-year program would recommend a consolidation of project 
activities around Mong Pawk and an extension of those 
activites to areas in the Wa territories north of Pang Sang, 
and to the Kokang. 
 
Opposition Leaders Concerned 
 
¶8. (C) The UNODC mission's evaluation of the situation in 
northern Shan State was stark, but accurate.  Recently, 
opposition party members in Kutkai, Lashio, and Muse, 
including members of Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for 
Democracy, called Poloff's attention to the plight of farmers 
who were forced out of opium this year with little support 
from the government other than a sporadic distribution of 
seeds for alternative crops.  According to the political 
parties, there is risk of starvation in this area. 
 
¶9. (C) Secondly, what the team found in northern Shan State 
is only part of the story.  Much of the opium production in 
northern Shan state has been eliminated; some, however, has 
simply been pushed into other regions.  NLD members in Kachin 
State in particular complained of large new areas of opium 
production around Bhamo, and possibly as far north as the 
Tanaing Valley north of Myitkyina.  Similarly, UNODC reports 
that production in central Shan State from Keng Tung over to 
Taunggyi and Pinlaung has also increased this year, partially 
offsetting the decline in northern Shan State.  Overall, it 
appears that opium cultivation will be down substantially in 
Burma as a whole this year; however, progress has been 
uneven.  In some areas, like northern Shan State, opium has 
been virtually completely eradicated.  In others, more 
acreage is under opium cultivation than has been the case for 
some years. 
 
Comment 
 
¶10. (C) The fate of former opium farmers in Burma will depend 
on how well donor nations respond to UNODC's appeal for 
assistance for some of the poorest people in the world.  The 
Japanese have indicated that they do intend to be heavily 
involved in the Kokang.  The European Union has also lately 
decided to provide $1.8 million for two INGOs (Aide Medicale 
International and Maltheser) to work closely with UNODC on 
the provision of basic health services in the Wa territories. 
 However, more will be needed.  In October 2002 (reftel), 
UNODC put forward a proposed program of approximately $4 
million/year for alternative development in Burma.  That 
program may be scaled up now on the basis of the assessment 
report, but even so, the total scale of the program required 
in Burma will be modest when measured against the need or 
against the opportunity of shutting down one of world's 
traditional centers of opium production. End Comment. 
Martinez