This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES/OMC DAVID HOGAN 
KATHMANDU FOR ENVIRONMENTAL HUB 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIS SENV ETRD CE
SUBJECT: 2003 SHRIMP/TURTLE CERTIFICATIONS UNDER 
SECTION 609 of P.L 101-162 - SRI LANKA 
 
REF: STATE 54094 
 
¶1.  Summary:  This cable responds to reftel request 
regarding Sri Lanka's sea turtle conservation program, 
and is based on information from the Ministry of 
Fisheries and Ocean Resources (MOFOR).  According to 
the MOFOR submission, Sri Lanka's fishing industry 
continues to use fishing methods that do not harm sea 
turtles.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Wild harvested shrimp fishery 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Sri Lanka's shrimp trawling grounds are located in 
the North, Northeast and Northwest.  The Government of 
Sri Lanka (GSL) has not issued any licenses for 
mechanized trawling in these areas.  MOFOR states that 
in the event mechanized shrimp trawling is allowed, 
Government will impose regulations requiring use of 
turtle excluder devices (TEDS) in mechanized trawlers. 
 
¶3.  There are three types of shrimp fisheries in Sri 
Lanka.  One uses small trawls that do not have otter 
doors.  The boats used in this fishery are non- 
mechanized and propelled by sails.  They trawl within 
about one mile from shore, where the depth of the sea 
is less than 12 meters.  Four fishermen go in each 
boat, and the trawl is towed manually.  Presently, 
over 150 boats are engaged in this type of fishery, 
which is practiced mostly in Negombo, in the western 
part of the country. 
 
¶4.  The second fishery uses trawls using 3.5 ton, 9- 
meter boats powered by 30-horsepower (HP) inboard 
engines.  The trawl is towed manually, usually by four 
to five fishermen.  The time taken to haul the trawl 
is less than one hour.  Presently there are about 60 
such boats.  This fishery is practiced in Wattala and 
Kalpitiya, in the western coastal belt. 
 
¶5.  The third fishery type uses cast netting (throw 
netting) in lagoons.  In this type of fishery, usually 
two fishermen go in small boats powered with an out- 
board motor and throw a cone-shaped net that has 
circular sinkers at the bottom and a cord connected to 
the apex.  The net surrounds the fish and shrimp, and 
sinks to the bottom, and is retrieved by pulling the 
cord.  Due to the weight of the sinkers, the mouth of 
the net keeps closed and therefore the fish and shrimp 
inside cannot escape.  Mostly subsistence or part-time 
fishermen practice this fishery. 
 
¶6.  According to the MOFOR, none of the above 
fisheries are harmful to sea turtles.  In 2002, the 
total shrimp catch was estimate at 5,500 tons.  Over 
70 percent of it came from aquaculture. 
 
----------------------------- 
Sea turtle protection program 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7.  GSL continues to conserve sea turtles.  Sea 
turtles are protected under provisions of the Fauna 
and Flora Protection Ordinance. 
 
¶8.  The above information describing Sri Lanka's wild 
harvested shrimp fishery methods was received at 
embassy Colombo from MOFAR, and dated March 12, 2003. 
 
WILLS