This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 001823 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/ICI/PII, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/IP/EUR, DS/ICI/CI, 
DS/IP/FPO 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER NL
SUBJECT:  SUSPICIOUS ACTIVITY NEAR AM CON GEN AMSTERDAM ON 
07/15/03 
 
¶1.   (SBU) At approximately 1555 hrs on 07/15/2003 The Royal 
Marechaussee (KMAR) Anti Terror Unit, deployed inside the 
fence line at the consulate, noted a suspicious individual 
on the Museumplein (public park area)just beyond the second 
fence line who appeared to be paying particular attention to 
their activity inside the grounds. The subject was carrying 
what has been described as a "jerry can". The subject walked 
around the immediate area and then approached the outer 
fence line not far from the Amsterdam Police fixed post, set 
down his container and walked away. 
 
¶2.   (SBU) The KMAR unsuccessfully attempted to notify the 
Amsterdam Police Post outside. The Police have 
responsibility for activity outside the fence line.  The 
KMAR made radio contact with the adjoining Amsterdam Police 
mobile unit but by the time response elements arrived the 
subject had left the area and was not located. The 
responding units found that the container bore the marking 
sulfuric acid/battery acid.  The area surrounding the 
container was roped off and the fire department responded 
and declared the contents to be a 51% solution of battery 
acid.  The fire department tested the solution, however, the 
can was left for another city department to collect. 
 
 
¶3.   (SBU) The subject is described as a white male, 
probably Dutch, wearing a yellow tee shirt.  He was 
variously described as middle aged or elderly.  No further 
description. 
 
¶4.   (SBU) The police established a clear zone around the 
jerry can but took no steps to clear the park or evacuate 
the Consulate.  Since there was no apparent threat or 
political motivation the authorities are not taking this as 
a threat to the consulate or an attempt to injure any person 
or property. 
 
SOBEL