This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 000900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/M, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, IIP/G/NEA- 
SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, MARCH 12: IRAQ; BLIX 
REPORTS; TURKEY'S REFUSAL OF US TROOPS; SHARED VALUES 
CAMPAIGN 
 
¶1.  Summary: Kuwaiti commentators show predictable sympathy 
to the US position with the UNSC and the Turkish 
Parliament's refusal to accept US troops for an attack on 
Iraq. Blix's "indecisive" reports are blamed for 
contributing to the disunity on the Security Council. 
Opposition to war in Iraq continues in Islamist circles with 
the radical Islamist "Salafist" group calling for opposition 
to this "new Crusade." 
 
A writer attacks the Department's Shared Values campaign, 
declaring that the State Department has abandoned it due to 
excessive criticism and the realization that US policies are 
to blame for its poor image in the Arab world. 
 
On the news pages, three more Kuwaitis were arrested on 
suspicion of providing intelligence to Iraq. The trial of 
Sami al-Mutairi, charged with the January 21 murder of 
American civilian defense contractor Michael Pouliot and the 
injuring of his colleague, began on March 12. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  News Stories: The Kuwaiti Salafi Movement (conservative 
Islamist) issued a press release denouncing American plans 
for war against Iraq, and calling on the Arab and Islamic 
worlds to confront this "new Crusade." 
 
The Kuwaiti Criminal Court began hearing of the case of Sami 
Al-Mutairi, charged with killing American citizen Michael 
Pouliot and injuring his colleague in a shooting attack on 
January 21, 2003. 
 
Three Kuwaitis were arrested on suspicion of providing 
intelligence to the Iraqi regime. 
 
Three Americans were detained for photographing military 
installations and sensitive areas of Kuwait International 
Airport. 
 
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, refuted Iraqi claims that the holes which 
were made in the border fence earlier this week were an 
aggression to which Kuwait will be legally held responsible: 
"Passages in the border fence were made on our land, and 
this is our right." 
 
Daily Al-Qabas reports that Washington is expected to order 
the departure of its non-essential diplomats and their 
families from Kuwait, Israel and Syria this week. 
 
Kuwait Airways has reduced the number of flights to some 
destinations during the month of March. 
 
Kuwait Petroleum Company states it will close two refineries 
if war breaks out. 
 
The Ministry of Health has begun vaccinating emergency 
medical workers against smallpox. 
 
The Humanitarian Operations Center, a liaison center for 
relief NGOs and the US military, was opened in Kuwait City 
on March 11. 
 
Peninsula Shield troops may be assigned to undertake 
humanitarian operations and to protect Iraqi refugees as 
necessary. 
 
Sheikh Dr. Mohammed Al-Sabah hailed Jordan's support of 
Kuwaiti issues in the recent Arab and Islamic summits, and 
King Abdullah's refusal to meet Ali Hassan Al-Majid, the 
military governor of Kuwait during the 1990-91 occupation, 
on a recent Arab trip. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3. "The Turkish Dilemma " 
Dr. Yacoub Al-Sharah wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(3/11): "Turkey has disappointed the US by not allowing it 
to deploy its forces in preparation for the expected war on 
Iraq despite Turkey's military and political agreements with 
the US. [T]his crisis is expected to get worse unless there 
is a sudden reversal of the Turkish parliament decision, or 
if Turkey does not offer alternate solution that coincides 
with the American demands." 
 
¶4. "The Blazing Reports" 
Lawyer Jamal Al-Kandari wrote in independent Al-Watan 
(3/11): "The gray Blix's reports regarding WMD in Iraq have 
contributed to creating a big gap among the 15 [Security 
Council members] at the UN. His reports were not decisive, 
despite the fact that he was convinced that Iraq had 
violated the resolutions. He imagined that being courteous 
with Iraq would contribute in Iraq's response to disclose 
its WMD. Blix's elastic statements in his reports have sowed 
sedition among the UN members." 
 
¶5. "Even in America There are Foolish Propagandists" 
Islamist Adel Al-Qassar wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(3/11):  "There are ignorant propagandists in the Isalmic 
world who deform the true image of Islam, just as there are 
foolish propagandists such as Senator Joseph Biden. [that 
are] radical extremists who distort the US image because 
they simply do not understand Islam. Both types of 
propagandists, Islamists and Americans alike, are considered 
a threat to the security and stability of their societies. 
The contradictory concepts of US efforts to improve its 
image, and its [Middle East policies] have led the US State 
Department to call off the Shared Values campaign in the 
face of criticism by Muslim Arabs in the US and abroad." 
 
¶6. "Your Father's Worries" 
Mohammad Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Qabas (3/11):  "To 
President George Bush, I share your father's worries at 
seeing his son walking alone on an unpaved road in preparing 
to make a decision against Iraq. [G]iven the circumstances, 
it would be wise to give international inspectors more time 
to scrap Iraqi WMD, as put forth in a plan supported by 
France, Germany, Russia and China. Mr. President, we once 
again share your father's worry about you and about the 
world. The question is, does ousting Saddam Hussein and his 
regime justify the enormous expected losses to be incurred 
by the US?" 
 
¶7. "USA: The Shelter for People from Tyrants and 
Suppressors" 
Nahar Al-Mikrad wrote in Independent Al-Watan (3/12):  "We 
cannot hide our admiration for the people and the great 
nation of the USA. America does not hide facts and its 
record is crystal clean. America confronted the Nazis and 
their allies and ended their dreams of expansion. We, as 
Kuwaitis and GCC citizens, appreciate the American stance 
and we can never forget their sacrifices for liberating us 
from Iraq. Today, the US and Britain are standing ready for 
the zero hour in order to remove the tyrant in Iraq." 
 
JONES