This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 001334 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/09/2006 
TAGS: EAID KISL PGOV PREL SOCI IZ
SUBJECT: REACHING OUT AT THE SHI'ITE FEAST OF AL-ARBA'EEN 
 
Classified By: DCM Frank C. Urbancic, reason: 1.5 (A) and (D) 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action cable.  Please see paragraph 5. 
 
 
¶2. (C)  Both the people and the Government of Kuwait support 
U.S. actions in Iraq very strongly.   Even here, however, the 
constant drumbeat in the Arabic press of U.S. anti-Muslim 
intent is having an effect.  In recent conversations worried 
Kuwaitis have engaged the Ambassador on ways that this 
negative image might be dispelled. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The Kuwaitis argue that it will be important for the 
United States, as it consolidates control of the southern 
part of Iraq, particularly to show deference and reverence 
for the Shi'ite shrines which are located in Najaf and 
Karbala. Our interlocutors suggest and Embassy agrees that 
the Shi'ite high holiday of al-Arba'een on or about April 22 
presents a real opportunity for the United States to show its 
respect for Muslims while also providing a boost to the local 
economy.   Every year on the Feast of al-Arba'een these 
shrines routinely distribute food to the poor to help them 
celebrate.  It is both a religious gesture and a form of aid 
to the poor.  It is greatly appreciated by the recipients and 
it is also viewed as a religious obligation.  While rich in 
symbolism, this food is not expensive, it consists primarily 
of cooked lamb and rice with various spices, delivered to 
poor families on large trays. 
 
¶4.  (C) Embassy recommends that this year the United States, 
via the U.S. military and/or ORHA, contribute lamb and rice 
for the poor on the al-Arba'een holiday.  Working with 
contacts inside the country, the United States could purchase 
large numbers of sheep, contract with Halal butchers to 
slaughter them, provide rice and other spices to local cooks 
and have the food delivered on trays to the mosques for 
distribution.  This would be a relatively simple procedure, 
but we believe it would have a high impact value inside Iraq 
at the grass roots level where we want to make the greatest 
impression.  It would also have a high international 
recognition factor, particularly in the Muslim world.  From 
contacts here we believe that probably each tray of food 
would cost no more than $20 on the local economy.  Although 
we would want to consult with religious leaders to be sure, 
we suppose 2000 trays would be about the maximum we could 
provide to the two mosques for distribution.  The program 
could be repeated on a smaller scale in other towns with a 
US-presence in cooperation with local religious leaders.  All 
told, an outlay of perhaps as little as USD 50,000 would have 
tremendous political impact while injecting significant 
liquidity into rural communities. 
 
¶5.  (U) Action Request:  Such a program would be worth its 
weight in gold.  We commend this idea to Washington for 
consideration and action. 
 
 
JONES