This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002715 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA NL BK
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE: U.S. DELEGATION TO BOSNIA WAR 
CRIMES COURT DONORS CONFERENCE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 299243 
 
¶1. (U)  SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
¶2. (U) Post warmly welcomes and grants country clearance to 
the U.S. Delegation attending  the October 30, 2003 donors 
conference for the Bosnia War Crimes court.  This delegation 
includes Ambassador at Large for War Crimes Pierre-Richard 
Prosper, Director of SEED Assistance Programs for Southeast 
Europe James M. Roberts, EUR/SCE Deputy Director for Bosnia 
Raffi Gregorian, Human Rights/Rule of Law Officer for 
Southeast Europe Jennifer Mitchell, Embassy Sarajevo Rule of 
Law Officer Richard Prosen, and Rajika Shah of S/WCI. 
 
¶3.  (U) Control Officer for this visit will be Legal 
Counselor Clifton M. Johnson, who may be reached at (31) (70) 
310 9378 (Office) or (31) (70) 517 8861 (Home) or (31) 61 280 
8049 (Mobile).  Reservations for two nights, arriving October 
29, 2003, (or three nights, in the case of Ms. Shah) have 
been made in the names of Mr. J. Roberts, Mr. R. Gergorian, 
Ms. J. Mitchell and Mr. R. Prosen at the following hotel: 
 
Sofitel Den Haag 
Koningin Julianaplein 35 
2595 AA  The Hague 
Phone:  (31) (70) 347 1827 
Fax:  (31) (70) 382 5927 
 
The hotel is easily accessible from Schipol Airport via train 
to Den Haag Centraal (to which the hotel is adjacent) or via 
taxi.  Room rate is Euro 115.00 per night, plus mandatory 
city tax of Euro 4.32 per person per night.  Breakfast is 
available for Euro 18.50 per person. 
 
¶4. (SBU) POST ACCESS: Visitors who need unescorted access 
into secure areas of the Mission must provide proof of at 
least a secret clearance.  Requesting cable did include such 
information for all but one traveler, who we understand will 
be forwarding clearance and itinerary in a septel, and 
appropriate access requests will be completed prior to the 
group's arrival. 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMPUTER and ELECTRONICS USAGE:  Inter-agency 
security standards prohibit the introduction or use of 
non-USG owned computer hardware and software at all USG 
diplomatic facilities.  Cell phones, palm pilots, radios and 
other convenience electronics are prohibited in all secure 
areas of the Mission. Travelers who anticipate having special 
needs in terms of either access or computer usage should 
contact the RSO office before arriving at post. 
 
¶6. (SBU) SECURITY ADVISORY:  Post provides the following 
threat assessment for The Netherlands:  The Department of 
State on July 29, 2003 issued a worldwide caution to alert 
Americans of the need to remain vigilant.  The Department of 
State reminds U.S. citizens of the continuing threat of 
terrorist actions that may target U.S. citizens and to update 
these potential threats.  The U.S. Government remains deeply 
concerned about the security of U.S. citizens overseas.  U.S. 
citizens are cautioned to maintain a high level of vigilance, 
to remain alert and to take appropriate steps to increase 
their security awareness. 
 
-- (SBU)  Tensions remaining from the recent events in Iraq 
may increase the potential threat to U.S. citizens and 
interests abroad, by terrorist and other groups.  Terrorist 
actions may include, but are not limited to, suicide 
operations, hijackings, bombings or kidnappings.  These may 
also involve commercial aircraft.  Other potential threats 
include conventional weapons,  such as explosive devices, or 
non-conventional weapons, such as chemical or biological 
agents.  Terrorists do not distinguish between official and 
civilian targets.  These may include facilities where 
American citizens and other foreigners congregate or visit, 
including residential areas, clubs, restaurants, places of 
worship, schools, hotels, outdoor recreation events or 
resorts and beaches.  U.S. citizens should remain in a 
heightened state of personal security awareness when 
attendance at such locations is unavoidable.  Please consult 
the Department's web site for text: http://travel.state.gov. 
In light of this caution, all visitors to the Netherlands are 
encouraged to assess their security posture and be alert to 
their surroundings for possible surveillance.  All visitors 
should exercise caution while traveling abroad, as U.S. 
citizens and facilities are often the target of groups 
demonstrating opposition to U.S. foreign policy. 
 
-- (U)  A concern for visitors is crime.  Most crimes against 
official Americans are limited to pick-pocketing and luggage 
theft.  Vandalism to and theft from automobiles and hotel 
rooms are not unknown.  Recently, theft of laptop computers 
has increased, especially at Schiphol Airport and major train 
stations.  The thieves operate in small groups that target 
travelers, are determined and well practiced at distraction 
theft.  Several official travelers have been victimized 
lately, losing personal and unclassified government 
computers, valuable software and data.  Travelers are 
reminded regulations require the use of the diplomatic pouch 
for shipment of classified equipment and information. 
 
-- (U)  Streets can be walked in relative safety, but as in 
any U.S. urban area, caution should be exercised after dark 
in the more populated cities of The Hague, Amsterdam, and 
Rotterdam.  Red-light districts and public transportation 
hubs are common locations for incidents of crime. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  Rate of Exchange on October 23, 2003:  $1 = Euro 
0.847 
SOBEL