This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L HARARE 001161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
BANGKOK FOR WIN DAYTON 
DS/OP/AF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINR ASEC ZI
SUBJECT: JUNE 6 MDC HARARE MARCH CANCELED - MASS ACTION DAY 
FIVE 
 
REF: A. HARARE 1149 
     ¶B. HARARE 1136 
     ¶C. HARARE 1122 
     ¶D. HARARE 1101 
     ¶E. HARARE 1097 
     ¶F. HARARE 1081 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) Due to an overwhelming youth militia presence in 
downtown Harare on June 6, the MDC planned to call off 
planned marches for Harare.  Business and traffic activity 
seemed close to normal on June 6, albeit slightly reduced 
from the previous day.  In calling for a march, and then not 
making any visible appearance, we cannot help but wonder 
whether the MDC has lost further political capital today. 
End Summary. 
 
No Marches Anticipated in Harare 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) In driving around Harare on the morning of June 6, 
Poloffs counted at least 200 youth militia members wearing 
white t-shirts on which were imprinted "No to Mass Action". 
Also visible were numerous groups of 3 - 4 police officers. 
According to a Canadian diplomat walking through Africa Unity 
Square later, at least 500 youth militia members had 
converged at Africa Unity Square in the center of Harare, the 
proposed destinations of the main MDC march in Harare.  The 
diplomat said about 100 police officers, some armed, were 
surrounding the Square.  According to an organizer, this 
pro-government group planned to hold a rally with speeches in 
the Square shortly.  Job Sikhala, MP for St. Mary's (a 
high-density suburb of Harare) said that soldiers in military 
vehicles had been deployed in St. Mary's for the past two 
days.  He said, due to their presence, the likelihood of MDC 
members marching in the streets was nil. 
 
¶3. (C) According to Gandi Mudzingwa, MDC Presidential 
Advisor, due to the overwhelming presence of youth militia 
members in downtown Harare, (he estimated the number to be 
2000) the MDC would call off marches for June 6 in Harare. 
He said up to 3000 MDC members were standing in bank or 
transport queues in downtown Harare waiting for the call to 
march, but instead would receive a stand down order as any 
attempt to march would certainly lead to violent clashes with 
the militia members.  He considered their effort nonetheless 
a success for having elicited a major youth militia response 
from the GOZ.  Mudzingwa said they had not yet made decisions 
on whether to go ahead with marches in other cities around 
Zimbabwe. 
 
Stayaway Better than June 5 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Driving around Harare on June 6, Poloffs observed 
about 20 percent of shops in downtown Harare, and 90 percent 
of businesses in the light industrial areas of Harare were 
closed.  Pedestrian and vehicle traffic in downtown Harare 
seemed normal.  Activity in the high-density suburb of Mbare 
seemed normal. 
 
¶5. (C) According to Richard Pope, a furniture manufacturer in 
Bulawayo, about 22 percent of his workers did not show up on 
June 6.  He said many other factories nearby were open and 
operating, most with an average of 75 percent of their normal 
workforces.  He said business and street traffic around 
Bulawayo seemed almost normal. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶6. (C) In driving around Harare Poloff's did not observe 
anyone who appeared to be gathering for a march.  In calling 
for a march, and then not making any visible appearance, we 
cannot help but wonder whether the MDC has lost further 
political capital.  End Comment. 
SULLIVAN