This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 001548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 4530/MAC/ANESA/OSA 
EMBASSIES FOR FCS OFFICES 
 
E.O 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: BEXP BTIO CE ECONOMICS
SUBJECT:  IMI - Investment Opportunities In Sri Lanka 
 
¶1.  The National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka will 
present "Intrad 2003", an Exhibition and Investor Forum 
on November 28 - 30, 2003 in Colombo, Sri Lanka.  The 
theme is "Regaining Sri Lanka - Invest in Our 
Infrastructure". 
 
¶2.  "Intrad 2003" will feature 10 key sectors 
identified for investment in infrastructure: 
transport, power and energy, information and 
communication technology, tourism, housing and 
construction, agriculture and rural economy, education 
services, banking and insurance, health services and 
environmental services.  Each responsible Sri Lankan 
government ministry will showcase its investment 
opportunities at this forum. 
 
¶3.  After two decades of ethnic conflict, the peace 
process initiated in January 2002 has created a more 
favorable environment for foreign participation in 
infrastructure development projects.  International 
support of the peace process was shown by the $ 4.5 
billion pledged for development and reconstruction at a 
recent donor conference in Tokyo.  Much of this money 
will go towards reconstruction and infrastructure 
development, and foreign investment is welcome. 
 
¶4.  Another attraction for investment is access to the 
Indian market through the Indo-Lanka Free Trade 
Agreement.  By adding 35% value in Sri Lanka to many 
products destined for India, manufacturers can 
eliminate or significantly cut tariffs into the 
subcontinent. 
 
¶5.  "Intrad 2003" offers the opportunity for investors 
to meet with and seek answers to all their queries 
with: 
¶A. Ministries and their allied departments/agencies. 
¶B. Investment promotion agencies such as the 
Board Of Investment Of Sri Lanka. 
¶C. Local and foreign companies who provide 
support services to investors. 
¶D. Local investors seeking investment 
opportunities on their own or through joint 
ventures. 
 
¶6.  An information desk at the investor forum will 
provide information on policy issues, government 
guidelines and tender procedures, regulatory framework, 
donor funding, investment opportunities in three key 
sectors such as power and energy, transportation 
air/land/sea and information and communication 
technology. 
 
¶7.  The registration fee is US Dollars 200/-. 
 
¶8.  Sri Lanka Airlines, the official carrier for 
"Intrad 2003" is offering discounts on their flights 
for registered investors.  Accommodation will be at 
Hotel Galadari, Colombo. 
 
For information please contact: 
 
NCCSL Conventions 
National Chamber Of Commerce Of Sri Lanka 
450 D.R. Wijewardene Mawatha, Colombo 10, Sri Lanka 
E-mail:  nccslcon@sltnet.lk or nccslsg@sltnet.lk 
Web:  www.investinlanka.lk 
 
Remarks:  The U.S. Embassy would appreciate receiving 
notification of U.S. firms' interest, which can be sent to: 
 
Commercial Attach 
U.S. Embassy 
210 Galle Road, P.O. Box 106 
Colombo, Sri Lanka 
Phone:  94-1-2448007 
Fax:  94-1-2437345 
E-Mail:  ManloweTL@state.gov 
 
LUNSTEAD