This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER MARR MOPS ETRD ETTC TU IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ: TURKEY'S U/S ZIYAL ON GC/TRIBES VISITS, 
"KURDISH CORPS," PROMOTING TURKMEN, AND NEED FOR SECOND 
BORDER GATE 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 6027 
     ¶B. ANKARA 5930 
     ¶C. ANKARA 5680 
     ¶D. ANKARA 5553 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman.  Reasons 1.5 B and D. 
ACTION REQUEST at para 4. 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (C) On Sept. 23, Turkish MFA Undersecretary Ziyal and 
Ambassador discussed a range of Iraq issues.  Ziyal said 
Iraqi tribes and the visiting Governing Council delegation 
told the Turks they did not want more foreign troops in Iraq. 
 However, if Turkey sent troops, the Turks should be distinct 
from US forces with a clearly different mission.  Ziyal also 
reported hearing that a "Kurdish Corps" of 19,000 peshmerga 
with heavy weapons was being set up on Iraq's borders with 
Turkey and Iran, a development Ziyal said would lay the basis 
for Kurdish secession in Iraq.  (We request clairification on 
this issue - see para 4).  He complained about the KDP's 
"arbitrary" attitude about operations on the Iraqi side of 
the Habur gate.  Ziyal noted that the Habur border crossing 
had reached its capacity, and urged the US and Turkey to 
begin talks on a second border crossing.  Pointing to the new 
Iraqi Turkmen Front leadership, Ziyal stressed Iraq's Turkmen 
have a contribution to make and need help from the CPA and 
the Iraqi Kurds to make it.  End Summary. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
Tribes and GC Say No Foreign Troops 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) MFA Undersecretary Ugur Ziyal and the Ambassador 
discussed Iraq issues Sept. 23.  Ziyal said the Iraqi tribes 
told the Turks that if Turkey sent troops to Iraq, they 
should be distinct from US forces and the Iraqi people should 
know the Turks had a different mission.  But basically, Ziyal 
said, the Iraqis do not want foreign troops.  These themes 
were repeated to the Turks by Ahmed Chalabi and the Governing 
Council (GC) that visited mid-Sept.  Ziyal said that despite 
this and the GC delegation's reluctance to welcome a Turkish 
contribution, Turkey continued to believe an invitation from 
the GC important. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Turkey Wants Agreement w/US on Timeline, Future of Iraq 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) If Turkey is going to send troops, Ziyal told the 
Ambassador, Turkey and the US must agree in advance on the 
broader political objectives: What kind of Iraq are the 
troops there to protect?  What is the timeframe for the troop 
presence and for setting up sovereignty?  What is the exit 
strategy?  He added that there must be agreement on the 
Turkish area of responsibility, and on lines of communication 
(LOC).  Implying the need for a LOC running through northern 
Iraq, Ziyal said that a LOC through Syria would be 
impossible.  Ziyal reported that all Iraqis mention the 
importance of a rapid transfer of sovereignty, and that 
Turkey understands that there is a process involved.  The 
constitutional process in particular, must go smoothly, he 
said.  Ziyal then warned that he heard elections might be 
conducted based on presentation of ration cards.  He 
cautioned that could be counterproductive, as cards may have 
changed hands/been bought or traded in the market place. 
 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Rumor of a 19,000 Strong Kurdish Corps 
-------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ziyal told the Ambassador he had heard that a "Kurdish 
Corps" of 19,000 Iraqi Kurds with heavy weapons was being set 
up on Iraq's borders with Turkey and Iran.  Such a 
development, he worried, would establish the basis "for the 
Kurds to go their own way.  And they've made no secret that 
is what they want to do, although they say the time is not 
right yet."  ACTION REQUEST: Please provide information we 
can share with the GOT on use of any sizable numbers of 
Kurdish troops on the borders, whether as border guards, 
elements of the new Iraqi army or other.  It will help us to 
be able to tell Ziyal whether there are concentrations of 
Kurdish troops on the border, and if so, in what capacity and 
under whose command. 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
Habur at Capacity - Need Second Gate 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
¶5. (C) Ziyal told the Ambassador that the Habur Gate has 
reached its capacity, that it will soon be renovated, and 
that renovation will decrease capacity at the crossing for a 
number of months.  The demand for capacity will increase, and 
considerably if Turkish troops deploy to Iraq.  Therefore, 
Ziyal said, it was time to begin discussions about a second 
border gate.  He said Turkey would like to start talks now. 
To open a new gate, 30 kilometers of new road, a bridge and 
housing for customs/border employees will need to be 
constructed.  The Ambassador replied that it would be useful 
to begin discussions about a second gate, but first we needed 
CPA coordination of the issue with the Iraqis to ensure they 
could meet the needs of establishing a second gate.  Ziyal 
said he hoped CPA would not be coordinating with the same 
Iraqis (i.e., the KDP) that have an interest in blocking the 
project or collecting illegitimate fees, and that it would be 
best if the matter were worked directly with the Iraqi MOI. 
The Ambassador told Ziyal that we needed to work together on 
both sides of the border to speed the inspection process. 
(COMMENT: This might provide an opening to pursue our 
previous proposal to simplify procedures between Turkey and 
Iraq.  See Ref C.) 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Turkey to Let Iraqi Businessmen Visit w/out Travel Docs 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Ziyal said there would be a trade fair in Diyarbakir 
on Sept. 27-28, and that a group of Iraqi businessmen had 
been invited.  Many of them would not have travel documents. 
The GOT wanted the USG to ensure the KDP let them cross the 
border into Turkey to attend the event.  Ziyal complained 
that the "arbitrary attitude" of the KDP at the border 
crossing was problematic.  The KDP realized that the 
situation in Iraq meant many people traveled without complete 
or valid documentation - in fact, many of the Iraqi Kurds 
came to Turkey without valid travel documents.  It was wrong, 
he asserted, to force travelers to Turkey that the Turks were 
willing to accept to pay special fees or go to Baghdad to buy 
documents.  This sort of implementation of border 
regulations, he said, was not helping the Kurds.  Ziyal noted 
that some of the GC delegation members came to Turkey without 
valid travel documents.  The Ambassador said we would help if 
we could, and urged Ziyal to get all the relevant information 
about the businessmen to us and to CPA in Baghdad (see Ref 
A). 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
Turkmen Have Contribution to Make - Work w/New Leaders 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) Noting that the Kirkuk Turkmen Congress had selected a 
new Iraqi Turkmen leadership, that was set up without 
Turkey's help and was "really on their own," Ziyal complained 
that previously, the Iraqi Turkmen Front (ITF) had been 
pushed out of any meaningful role by the US military, which 
saw the ITF as an extension of Turkey.  As a consequence, 
Ziyal claimed, all Iraqi Turkmen had been excluded.  He said 
that having the same level of representation as the Assyrians 
had left a bad taste in Iraqi Turkmen mouths.  The new 
Turkmen Front leader is, Ziyal said, more capable than the 
previous chairman.  The US should, he urged, help the new 
Turkmen leadership get their people into the administration 
to represent the needs of the Turkmen community.  Ziyal 
(strictly protect) complained that GC member Songul Chapuk 
was extremely unimpressive, seemed uninformed and changed her 
position back and forth on key issues.  (COMMENT: Although we 
have had no contact with Chapuk, we have heard from other 
sources, including Turkish ministers, that she is quite 
capable.) 
 
 
¶8. (C) Deputy Undersecretary Ali Tuygan added that the 
Turkmen had been punished by a low percentage of 
representation and by the quality of the people chosen to 
represent them.  The Ambassador replied that we took note of 
the changes resulting from the Kirkuk Congress and would see 
over time how that change manifested itself in Iraqi 
politics.  The objective, the Ambassador stressed, should be 
to move away from numbers and percentages of sectarian 
representation and toward a time when all peoples there think 
of themselves as Iraqis.  After the formal meeting, in a 
one-on-one with the Ambassador, Ziyal admitted that Turkish 
policy regarding the Turkmen had been a mistake.  However, 
Ziyal said, the Iraqi Turkmen do have a significant 
contribution to make.  They will need help from the CPA and 
the Kurds to make it.  The decisions at Kirkuk represented 
real change, Ziyal insisted, and he hoped that those changes 
would find resonance in the US approach to the Turkmen. 
 
 
¶9. (U)  Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN