This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 001981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: 104 (LESS PROMINENT) JORDANIANS SIGN 
SECOND LETTER SUPPORTING KING ABDULLAH'S ANTI-WAR EFFORTS 
 
REF: AMMAN 1954 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman for reasons 1.5 (B)(D) 
 
--------------- 
DUELING LETTERS 
--------------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  On April 2nd, Al Arab Al Yawm newspaper published a 
second letter addressed to King Abdullah.  The letter 
contains one basic point -- the signatories support the 
King's handling of the war and his continuing efforts to stop 
the "aggression" against Iraq.  The letter also praises the 
King's wise and brave leadership.  The letter's signatories 
include both prominent and lesser known Jordanians, but the 
list generally lacks the luster of those who signed the March 
31 letter (reftel).  Among the signers are ex 
parliamentarians, a former speaker of the Lower House, 
businessmen and prominent tribal leaders.  We note that, 
while this letter calls for efforts to stop the war, it does 
not mention the U.S. or UK. 
 
-------------------------------- 
IT'S ABOUT THE KING'S LEGITIMACY 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  PolCouns spoke April 2 with Naif Mawla, former MP 
and signatory of the second letter.  Mawla said that he had 
been shown the draft of the first letter, but -- although he 
opposes the war in Iraq -- had declined to associate himself 
with it because of its implied questioning of the King's 
legitimacy.  After the publication of the first letter, Mawla 
said, he and several other pro-Hashemite politicians -- we 
suspect in cooperation with the Palace -- decided to draft a 
second letter to show their support for the King's stand. 
Mawla, at several points during the conversation, said he 
hoped that Jordan would be able to benefit economically in 
the new Iraq.  No one will miss Saddam Hussein, he assured 
us. 
 
¶3.  (C)  King Abdullah, while never directly addressing the 
first letter, expressed April 1 his support for the measures 
undertaken by the government during the "difficult 
circumstances" in the region.  The King expressed "deep 
concern" over the rise in civilian casualties and called upon 
the government to make every effort to guarantee the 
protection of Iraqi civilians.  Lastly, the King praised 
Jordanians for how "responsible" they have been during past 
demonstrations. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  The appearance of the second letter -- whether 
orchestrated by the Palace or not -- should reduce the sting 
of the first letter somewhat.  The King's April 1 statement 
in support of the government's efforts seems designed to 
counter the idea that the government is not doing anything to 
act on the rage and sorrow felt by most Jordanians.  We 
expect to see other such statements in the days ahead. 
GNEHM