This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002204 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2013 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT PREL ASEC CASC CVIS EFIN ETRD IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: AMMAN SITREP 33 (4/10 1845 LOCAL) 
 
REF: (A) FBIS GMP20030409000226 
 
Classified By: DCM Gregory L. Berry for reasons 1.5 (B)(D). 
 
---------------- 
General Overview 
---------------- 
 
¶1. (C) Most Jordanians are still sorting through the complex 
emotions unleashed by the events of the past 24 hours in 
Baghdad and elsewhere in Iraq.  Many appear in a state of 
shock that Saddam's rule collapsed so quickly, depressed that 
"once again the Arabs have lost," and uncomfortable with the 
sight of American troops occupying a historic Arab capital. 
Generally, however, they are relieved -- relieved that their 
worst nightmares about the war's impact on Jordan failed to 
occur and relieved that the human suffering of Iraqis appears 
close to an end.  Most continue to remain deeply skeptical of 
U.S. motives and fear that Israel will use these events to 
its advantage against the Palestinians.  It is clear that 
many are struggling to reconcile their disappointment and 
shock with the undeniable scenes of joy in Baghdad. 
 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (U) See para 11 below. 
 
---------------------- 
GOJ Actions/Statements 
---------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) In an April 9 letter addressed to PM Ali Abul Ragheb, 
King Abdullah directed the GOJ to "take all necessary 
measures to launch a national campaign to extend humanitarian 
aid and secure essential medical and food supplies to the 
Iraqi people." (Jordan Times April 10) 
 
¶4. (U) Minister of Information Mohammad al-Adwan stated April 
9 that Jordan would not "interfere in the issue of 
determining the future government of Iraq.  The future and 
destiny of Iraq should be in the hands of its people.  Jordan 
will under no circumstances accept division of Iraq." (Jordan 
Times, April 10) 
 
¶5. (U) Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher, Minister of Energy 
and Mineral Resources Mohammed Batayneh, and Minister of 
Information Adwan April 9 all categorically denied rumors 
that Jordanian and Israeli officials will meet to discuss the 
possibility of restarting an old oil pipeline linking Iraq to 
the Israeli port of Haifa through Jordan.  Adwan stated that 
"no contacts have been made with anyone regarding such an 
issue."  Batayneh characterized the rumors as "groundless and 
totally untrue." (Jordan Times April 10).  FM Muasher echoed 
these statements in an April 9 interview on Al-Jazeera and 
added that "any improvement in relations with Israel is 
contingent on how the Israeli government is responsive with 
the Middle East peace efforts." (ref A) 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶6. (C) The investigation into the April 8 shooting incident 
involving an Embassy TDYer continues (septel). This evening 
two public gatherings in Amman are planned in response to the 
Jordanian journalist killed in Iraq.  As of 1500 local, the 
PSD has not yet confirmed whether any demonstrations or 
gatherings are expected for this weekend. 
 
------------------------------- 
Economic and Trade Developments 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) No new issues. 
 
--------------------------- 
Refugee/Humanitarian Issues 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8. (S) The Jordan-Iraq border remains open.  CENTCOM sources 
report that Iraqi officials have abandoned their border 
posting, leaving the Iraqi side of the Karameh border 
crossing unstaffed and vacant.  One report said the Iraqi 
border officials reportedly joined the 100-plus car convoy of 
journalists headed east on Hwy 10; but in fact that convoy 
decided to remain near the border overnight.   CENTCOM 
elements indicate that U.S. forces are moving to control the 
now abandoned Iraqi border checkpoints with Jordan (Karameh) 
and Syria (near the Syrian town of at-Tanf). 
 
¶9. (SBU) IOM reports that 11 TCNs crossed the border into 
Jordan on April 9.  No TCNs or Iraqi refugees have crossed 
into Jordan today.  IOM is repatriating 38 Moroccans, 14 
Somalis and 3 Iraqis with Egyptian travel documents later 
today.  The total TCN transit camp population hovers around 
200, comprised of Somali and Sudanese nationals who do not 
want to be repatriated, 24 undocumented Palestinians and six 
Iraqi refugees.  The Jordan Red Crescent agreed to house the 
Iraqi refugees indefinitely, as it would not be 
cost-effective for UNHCR to open its camp for only six 
refugees.  IOM is in the process of scaling down its TCN 
transit operations and will leave only 1 international and 8 
locally hired employees in Ruwaished. 
 
¶10. (SBU) UNHCR and IOM hope to convince the Government of 
Jordan to allow the 24 Palestinians to join relatives in 
Amman, provided those relatives provide letters of guarantee. 
 They are meeting with the GOJ later this afternoon to 
discuss the issue. 
 
----- 
Press 
----- 
 
¶11. (SBU) A large convoy of journalists, including Amcits, is 
crossing into Iraq from Jordan today.  The convoy, estimated 
at between 75 and 120 vehicles, was at the border at 
approximately 1330 local. It was expected to break up into 
multiple convoys once having crossed into Iraq.  Embassy 
Amman and CENTCOM Public Affairs liaison have continued to 
urge strongly against travel into what remains an active 
battle area.  We have told all who will listen that there can 
be no guarantee of security offered by Coalition military 
forces.  The Government of Jordan has come under intense 
pressure from the journalists to allow passage, and we 
understand they are processing the group slowly through the 
border.  We have informed CENTCOM of the issue.  We do not 
have a complete list of who is in this group of journalists. 
According to CBS, Dan Rather is among them.  Rather is 
determined, apparently, to reach Baghdad tonight.  Others 
simply want to get inside Iraq so that they can file 
datelines from inside Iraqi territory.  The Consular Section 
is prepared to assist any Amcit journalists who may encounter 
problems and return to Jordan.  We will continue to follow 
this situation closely and will provide updates to the CMS 
Task Force via e-mail as they become available. 
 
GNEHM