This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 001454 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/06/2008 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES SECURITY WITH INTERIOR 
MINISTER 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador W. Robert Pearson; reasons 1.5 b and 
d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Interior Minister Aksu told Ambassador that 
Americans in Turkey do not face a greater threat following 
Parliament's failure to approve the stationing of U.S. 
troops.  Aksu said the GOT will continue to provide 24-hour 
security to the U.S. diplomatic community, and will maintain 
order during anti-war protests.  Ambassador requested random 
vehicle checks on a street abutting Embassy grounds; Aksu 
said he will direct police to review the issue.  Ambassador 
said the U.S. will continue to work closely with the GOT. 
End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Ambassador thanked Interior Minister Aksu during a 
March 6 meeting for the excellent security provided by police 
to the entire American diplomatic community.  Ambassador said 
he had met March 4 with Embassy spouses, who wanted to know 
whether Parliament's March 1 vote failing to approve the 
stationing of U.S. troops in Turkey has heightened security 
risks for Americans.  Ambassador said he would like to hear 
Aksu's views.  Aksu said he does not believe the 
parliamentary vote will lead to an increased threat against 
Americans.  The longstanding friendship between Turkey and 
the U.S. will continue.  In Turkey, as in many countries, 
there are staunchly anti-American groups, but they are 
marginal and insignificant.  Some violent groups, 
particularly KADEK (formerly PKK) are trying to manipulate 
anti-war protests for their own ends.  The GOT will allow 
people to express their views, but will maintain control, as 
it did March 1 when police prevented demonstrators from 
marching to the Parliament building.  The GOT will continue 
to provide 24-hour security to the Embassy community. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Aksu said the media and elements of the GOT are 
distorting the Iraq issue, depicting the resolution on U.S. 
troop deployment as a pro-U.S., pro-war measure.  In fact, 
the resolution supports Turkey's interests.  Aksu said he 
will continue to make this argument to Cabinet members and 
parliamentarians.  Ambassador said he appreciated the 
Government's courage in taking the controversial resolution 
to a vote.  The U.S. remains a friend and ally of Turkey, and 
will continue to work closely with the GOT. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ambassador said there is one gap in the otherwise 
excellent security around the Embassy grounds -- the lack of 
vehicle inspection on Paris Caddesi, which runs very close to 
some Embassy facilities.  The GOT has installed a barrier on 
Paris, but it is kept in the upright position and random 
inspections are not being conducted.  The image of the unused 
barrier could cause someone to think there is an opening that 
could be exploited for an attack.  Random vehicle inspection 
would have a critical deterrent effect.  Aksu said he will 
direct the Ankara Police Chief to review the situation and 
contact Embassy RSO.  The GOT will take the necessary 
measures to protect the Embassy.  Ambassador thanked Aksu and 
said he might have to seek increased GOT security assistance 
in the event of war in Iraq. 
 
 
PEARSON