This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 000708 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL CA UNHRC
SUBJECT: CANADA'S PRIORITIES: 59TH COMMISSION ON HUMAN 
RIGHTS 
 
REF: STATE 64728 
 
Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Mary Witt for reasons 1.5(b) 
and (d). 
 
¶1. (C)  Embassy delivered the talking points contained reftel 
to Adrian Norfolk, Deputy Director for Human Rights in 
DFAIT's Human Rights, Humanitarian Affairs and International 
Women's Equality Division, on March 12.  Norfolk stated that 
Canada's overall objective for CHR-59 is restoration of CHR's 
credibility through the improvement of its efficiency and 
effectiveness. Canada will pursue this objective by 
encouraging member states to reduce the number of voted 
resolutions, reduce the total number of resolutions 
(including through biennialisation), and review the 
effectiveness/marginal value of various mechanisms. In sum, 
Canada wants CHR to return to decision by consensus to the 
maximum extent possible, Norfolk said. 
 
¶2.  (C)  With respect to Canada's support for the specific 
resolutions set out reftel, Norfolk responded as follows: 
 
Cuba:  Canada will co-sponsor a resolution on human rights in 
Cuba, provided that the resolution is balanced. 
 
Iraq:  Canada will support a resolution on Iraq. 
 
Middle East:  Canada will consider supporting Middle East 
resolutions only if they are balanced; it will not support 
unbalanced resolutions. 
 
North Korea:  Canada will support a resolution if one is 
introduced. 
 
Zimbabwe:  Canada will support a resolution.  Canada believes 
that the inability of the CHR to consider the situation in 
Zimbabwe was another serious blow to the Commission's 
credibility. 
 
Chechnya:  Canada will support a resolution, or chairman's 
statement. 
 
Belarus:  Canada will co-sponsor a resolution if satisfied 
with the draft text. 
 
Iran:  Canada will support a resolution if the EU runs one. 
Note: I asked Norfolk if Canada is considering introducing an 
Iran resolution if the EU does not.  Norfolk said there have 
been discussions about this within DFAIT, that MFA Bill 
Graham has a lot of interest in the situation in Iran, and 
that a Canada resolution is a possibility. End note. 
 
Turkmenistan:  Canada will co-sponsor. 
 
Sudan:  Canada will support a resolution on Sudan. 
 
China:  No commitment of support was given for a resolution 
on China, but if the U.S. offers one Canada will strongly 
oppose a no-action motion. 
 
CELLUCCI