This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 26 COLOMBO 001389 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EB/IFD/OIA, SA/INS, EB CBA 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO USTR, EXIM, TDA 
MANILA FOR USADB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV EFIN ELAB ETRD KTDB PGOV CE OPIC ECONOMICS
SUBJECT: INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 2003 FOR SRI 
LANKA 
 
REF: (A) STATE 128494 
 
¶1.  The following is the 2003 Investment Climate 
Statement for Sri Lanka.  This report will be 
included in post's FY 2004 Country Commercial Guide 
to be sent separately. 
 
Begin text. 
 
INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
SRI LANKA, JULY 2003 
 
Openness to Foreign Investment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  Sri Lanka actively welcomes foreign investment, 
which has become an important element of the 
country's economic growth.  Sri Lanka opened its 
economy to foreign investment in 1978, long before 
its South Asian neighbors, but results have been 
mixed.  Over the past twenty-five years, several 
hundred foreign investors have invested in the 
country but foreign investment flows have been weak 
in the last decade due to an ethnic conflict, and 
economic and political problems.  This situation is 
improving due to current peaceful conditions in the 
country, economic reforms and an infrastructure 
development plan backed by increased foreign aid. 
Although many investors have done well, some have had 
problems with government practices and regulations. 
 
¶3.  Sri Lanka's economic growth has been reasonable, 
averaging 4.6 percent during the past decade.  The 
country boasts unique human development achievements 
for a developing country.  Sri Lanka's per capita 
income of $872, a literacy rate of over 90 percent 
and life expectancy of 72 years rank well above those 
of India, Bangladesh and Pakistan. 
 
¶4.  The current United National Front (UNF) 
Government, led by Prime Minister Ranil 
Wickremasinghe of the United National Party (UNP), 
came into office in December 2001 on a platform of 
peace and economic revival.  It is strongly pro- 
business and investor friendly.  The UNF government 
has moved to increase foreign investment and private 
sector activity in key sectors of the economy, 
initially concentrating on infrastructure 
development.  The government has launched an 
extensive deregulation and economic reform program to 
facilitate private sector activity and improve 
economic growth.  These programs are outlined in 
"Regaining Sri Lanka" (www.regainingsrilanka.org), a 
policy document of the Government of Sri Lanka.  In 
support of these programs, the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) approved a Poverty Reduction and Growth 
Facility (PRGF) (www.imf.org/external/country/LKA) 
for Sri Lanka in April 2003.  International donors, 
including the IMF, have pledged a total of $4.7 
billion in grants and concessional loans for Sri 
Lanka for a four-year period from 2003.  These funds 
will be used to facilitate development in the south, 
and reconstruction in the north and east heavily 
damaged by the ethnic conflict. 
 
¶5. The most notable achievement of the UNF government 
has been the ceasefire agreement signed on February 
21, 2002, between the Government and the Liberation 
Tigers of Tamil Ealam (LTTE).  Although ceasefire 
violations continue, the agreement has led to Sri 
Lanka's most stable and peaceful period of the last 
20 years.  Both parties have expressed their 
commitment to a negotiated settlement, and have held 
six rounds of talks with the Government of Norway 
acting as facilitator.  As of August 2003, the LTTE, 
which pulled out of the peace talks in April 2003, is 
reviewing a government paper on an interim 
administration in the North and East.  There is hope 
that the next round of peace talks may be held in the 
near future.  The peace process has substantially 
improved the political, economic and investment 
climate and has resulted in attracting substantial 
funding from multilateral and bilateral donors to 
rebuild the country.  This has boosted foreign 
investor interest. 
 
¶6.  Numerous risks and challenges remain, however. 
The peace process could falter.  Domestic political 
frictions could disrupt the peace process or hamper 
economic reform.  Cohabitation tensions exist between 
the President and Prime Minister, representing 
opposing political parties.  The President has 
delegated most of her executive powers to the Prime 
Minister and his cabinet of ministers, but retains 
constitutional power to dismiss the parliament and 
call for elections.  Such an action could disrupt 
progress on peace and economic reforms.  One major 
business concern in the medium term is the cost and 
supply of power.  Sri Lanka has faced periodic power 
shortages since 1994, with the most recent period 
extending from mid 2001 to early 2002.  Although new 
power plants are being added, the Government is yet 
to procure base load power needed to avert a power 
crisis in the medium term.  Most businesses have 
installed on site generating capacity. 
 
Board of Investment 
 
¶7.  The Board of Investment (BOI) (www.boi.lk), an 
autonomous statutory agency, is the primary 
government authority responsible for foreign 
investment.  The BOI acts as a facilitator for 
investment.  It is intended to provide "one-stop" 
service for foreign investors, including approval of 
projects, granting incentives and arranging services 
such as water, power, waste treatment and 
telecommunications.  The BOI also assists in 
obtaining resident visas for expatriate personnel and 
facilitates import and export clearance. 
 
¶8.  The Bureau for Infrastructure Investment (BII) 
(www.boi.lk), a division of BOI, coordinates all 
private infrastructure projects.  Projects are 
usually structured on the basis of build, own, 
operate (BOO), build, operate, and transfer (BOT) or 
build, own, operate and transfer (BOOT). 
 
Laws Affecting Investment 
 
¶9.  The principal law governing foreign investment is 
Law No. 4 of 1978 (known as the BOI Act), including 
amendments made in 1980, 1983 and 1992, and 
implementing regulations established under the Act. 
The BOI Act provides for two types of investment 
approvals.  Under section 17 of the Act, the BOI is 
empowered to grant concessions (see details below) to 
companies satisfying certain eligibility criteria. 
Investment approval under section 16 of the act 
permits entry for foreign investment to operate under 
the "normal" laws of the country and is applicable to 
investments that do not satisfy eligibility criteria 
for BOI incentives.  Other laws affecting foreign 
investment are the Securities and Exchange Commission 
Act of 1987, amendments made in 1991 and 2003 and the 
Takeovers and Mergers Code of 1995.  In addition, 
various labor laws and regulations affect investors. 
See sections below. 
 
 
¶10.  In early 2003, the Parliament passed a new BOI 
law to bring BOI's power to grant tax holidays and 
incentives with in the regular income tax law.  BOI 
will retain most of the other powers granted under 
earlier laws; it will be responsible for investment 
approvals and granting of other incentives.  The new 
law also provides for decentralization of some BOI 
activities to five regional economic development 
commissions formed under the BOI.  These commissions 
are to promote development in the regions, provide 
facilities for investments, and develop and manage 
export processing zones.  As of July 2003, although 
the new law had not come into force, some of the 
commissions had been established.  When the new law 
comes into effect, the previous BOI Act of 1978 will 
be automatically repealed. 
 
Foreign Equity and Sectors 
 
¶11.  Foreign equity participation of up to 100 
percent is allowed in many sectors of the economy and 
the BOI gives automatic approval for most foreign 
investments. 
 
 
¶12.  The Government relaxed investment rules in early 
2002, allowing 100 percent foreign investment in the 
following services: banking, finance, insurance, 
stockbroking, construction of residential buildings 
and roads, supply of water, mass transportation, 
telecommunications, production and distribution of 
energy, professional services and the establishment 
of liaison offices or local branches of foreign 
companies.  These services are regulated and subject 
to approval by various government agencies.  The 
screening mechanism is non-discriminatory and, for 
the most part, routine. 
 
¶13.  Investment in some other sectors is restricted 
and subject to screening and approval on a case-by- 
case basis, where foreign equity exceeds 49 percent: 
shipping and travel agencies; freight forwarding; 
fishing; timber-based industries; growing and primary 
processing of tea, rubber, coconut, rice, cocoa, 
sugar and spices; and, finally, the production for 
export of goods subject to international quota. 
Foreign investment restrictions and government 
regulations also apply to international air 
transportation; coastal shipping; lotteries; large- 
scale mechanized gem mining; and "sensitive" 
industries such as military hardware, dangerous drugs 
and currency. 
 
¶14.  Foreign investment is not permitted in the 
following businesses: non-bank money lending; pawn- 
broking; retail trade with a capital investment of 
less than $1 million (with one notable exception: the 
BOI permits retail and wholesale trading by reputed 
international brand names and franchises with an 
initial investment of not less than US$ 150,000); 
personal services other than for the export or 
tourism sectors; coastal fishing; education of Sri 
Lankan citizens under 14 years; and award of local 
university degrees. 
 
¶15.  In general, the treatment given to foreign 
investors is non-discriminatory.  In fact, some local 
companies have complained that they are discriminated 
against, while qualifying foreign investors can 
benefit from a wide range of advantages.  Even with 
incentives and BOI facilitation, foreign investors 
can face difficulties operating here.  Problems range 
from the mundane, but critical, matter of clearing 
equipment and supplies through customs speedily, to 
getting land for factories.  The BOI encourages 
investors to locate their factories in industrial 
processing zones managed by the BOI to overcome land 
allocation problems.  Investors locating in 
industrial zones also get access to relatively better 
infrastructure facilities such as reliable power, 
telecommunication and water supplies. 
 
¶16.  Government treatment of foreign investors in the 
privatization process has been largely non- 
discriminatory.  Recently, however, the government 
sold part of retail operations of state-owned Ceylon 
Petroleum Corporation (CPC) to Indian Oil Corporation 
(IOC) without a formal tender process.  Caltex, which 
had earlier acquired a government owned lubricant 
plant and obtained exclusivity in the sale of 
lubricants in CPC outlets till mid-2004, has also 
complained that the Government had reneged on the 
terms of the exclusivity agreement.  Labor unions in 
the state-owned enterprises are often opposed to 
privatization and seem particularly averse to foreign 
owners, which has made the purchase of certain 
strategic entities problematic for new foreign 
owners.  In addition, some privatization sales, 
particularly to foreign investors, have been 
controversial.  Sometimes liberal and unwieldy 
concessions, not announced during the bidding process 
were granted to investors, and other times 
substantive changes were introduced once the process 
had begun. 
 
Investment Trends 
 
¶17.  Foreign direct investment flows to Sri Lanka 
have averaged only about $140 million per year 
(excluding privatization receipts) in the past 
decade.  Since the commencement of the peace process 
and improved investor confidence, foreign investment 
flows rose to over $245 million in 2002.  FDI has 
funded mainly infrastructure projects (power, 
telecom, ports) and manufacturing industries. 
Investment approvals by BOI also rose sharply in 
¶2002.  FDI is expected to rise further this year to 
over $350 million.  The stock market also recovered 
markedly in 2002 to become the second best performing 
market in Asia.  The upward trend is continuing, with 
the market recording an all time high in June 2003. 
Both foreign direct investment and portfolio 
investment are expected to rise further due to 
increased investor confidence, private sector 
participation in infrastructure and utilities, 
increased donor funding and incentives provided by 
the BOI.  The UNF government's privatization and 
economic reform programs offer new investment 
opportunities for foreign investors.  In addition, 
the Indo-Lanka Free Trade Agreement, which offers 
duty free entry into India for most products with 35 
percent Sri Lankan value addition, offers a gateway 
for foreign investors in Sri Lanka to access markets 
in India.  Currently, US companies avail themselves 
of this agreement adding 35% value in Sri Lanka and 
getting import duties into India reduced from as much 
as 40 percent to as little as zero. 
 
Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Sri Lanka has accepted Article VIII status of 
the IMF and has liberalized exchange controls on 
current account transactions.  In early 2001, in 
response to a fall in Sri Lanka's foreign exchange 
reserves, the Central Bank brought in temporary 
controls on foreign exchange transactions, which have 
since been removed.  There are no surrender 
requirements on export receipts, but exporters need 
to repatriate export proceeds within 120 days to 
settle export credit facilities.  Other export 
proceeds can be retained abroad.  Currently, 
contracts for forward bookings of foreign exchange 
are permitted for a maximum period of 360 days for 
the purposes of payments in trade and 720 days for 
the repayment of loans. 
 
¶19.  There are also no barriers, legal or otherwise, 
to the expeditious remitting of corporate profits and 
dividends for foreign enterprises doing business in 
Sri Lanka.  Remittance of business fees (management 
fees, royalties and licensing fees) is also freely 
permitted.  Funds for debt service and capital gains 
of BOI-approved companies exempted from exchange 
control regulations are freely permitted.  Other 
foreign companies remitting funds for debt service 
and capital gains require Central Bank approval.  All 
stock market investments can be remitted without 
prior approval of the Central Bank.  Investment 
returns can be remitted in any convertible currency 
at the legal market rate.  Controls on capital 
account (investment) transactions usually prohibit 
foreigners from investing in debt and fixed income 
securities.  One exception has been the Central 
Bank's dollar denominated bond issues in the local 
market in 2001-2002, which were opened to foreign 
investors.   It has been proposed to allow foreigners 
to invest in corporate debentures and government 
bonds. 
¶20.  Local companies require Central Bank approval to 
invest abroad.  The process of granting approval for 
such investments was streamlined in 2002, resulting 
in a substantial increase in approvals. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------- 
 
¶21.  Since economic liberalization policies began in 
1978, the Sri Lankan Government has never been 
legally found to have expropriated a foreign 
investment.  Under the terms of the US/Sri Lanka 
Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT), investors have the 
right to arbitration under the International Center 
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).  A 
longstanding dispute involving an alleged 
expropriation of a US company's investment was 
satisfactorily resolved during 1998 after lengthy 
negotiations involving the company, the Sri Lankan 
Foreign Ministry, the Sri Lankan Attorney General and 
the US Embassy. 
 
Dispute Settlement 
------------------ 
 
Legal System 
 
¶22.  Sri Lankan commercial law is almost entirely 
statutory.  The law was codified before independence 
in 1948 and reflects the letter and spirit of British 
law of that era.  It has, by and large, been amended 
to keep pace with subsequent legal changes in the 
U.K.  The court system is largely free from 
government interference.  Procedures exist for 
enforcing foreign judgments.  Litigation can be very 
time consuming.  Several important legislative 
enactments regulate commercial matters:  the Board of 
Investment Law, the Code of Intellectual Property, 
the Companies Act, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission Act, the Banking Act, and the Industrial 
Promotion Act.  Most of these laws are being revised 
to meet current business practices.  In addition, a 
new Consumer Affairs Authority Act, with wide ranging 
provisions for consumer protection was enacted in 
¶2003. 
 
Bankruptcy Laws 
 
¶23.  The Companies Act and the Insolvency Ordinance 
e 
provide for winding up insolvent companies, but 
existing legislation hinders smooth re-organization. 
Currently, there is no mechanism to facilitate the 
re-organization of financially troubled companies. 
The Termination Act, for example, prohibits employers 
from laying off workers even on the grounds of 
inefficiency.  At the urging of the business 
community and the donor agencies, the Government took 
steps to reform labor laws in 2003.  The Parliament 
has passed an amendment to the Termination Act to 
facilitate easier retrenchment, but its 
implementation has been delayed until the development 
of a compensation formula and an unemployment 
insurance scheme for displaced workers.  The new 
termination law is expected to come into force in 
December 2003, but could be delayed. 
 
¶24.  In the absence of proper Bankruptcy Laws, extra 
judicial powers granted to financial institutions by 
law protect rights of the creditors and have helped 
to strengthen credit discipline.  Lenders are able to 
enforce financial contracts through powers that allow 
them to foreclose on loan collateral without the 
intervention of courts.  Recently, though, financial 
institutions have faced legal challenges, as 
defaulters obtain restraining orders on frivolous 
grounds due to technical defects in the recovery 
laws.  Also, for default cases that are filed in 
courts, the judicial process is time consuming.  The 
private sector has urged the Government to introduce 
US Chapter 11-style Bankruptcy laws.  The financial 
community has requested strengthening of debt 
recovery laws. 
 
Investment Protection 
¶25.  Foreign investments are, in principle, 
guaranteed protection by the constitution of Sri 
Lanka.  The Government has entered into 24 investment 
protection agreements with foreign governments 
(including the United States) and is a founding 
member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency (MIGA) of the World Bank.  Sri Lanka is also a 
founding member of the World Trade Organization.  The 
Government has ratified the provisions of the 
convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes, 
which provides the mechanism and facilities for 
international arbitration through the ICSID of the 
World Bank. 
 
¶26.  The US-Sri Lanka BIT was ratified by both 
governments in early 1993.  A bilateral treaty on 
avoidance of double taxation was signed in September 
¶2002.  The treaty shall enter into force upon 
ratification by the respective governments and the 
exchange of instruments of ratification. 
 
¶27.  Settlement of disputes through the Sri Lankan 
court system is subject to protracted and 
inexplicable delay.  Aggrieved investors (especially 
those dealing with the Government of Sri Lanka on 
projects) have frequently pursued out-of-court 
settlements, which offer the possibility -- not 
frequently realized -- of speedier resolution of 
disputes. 
 
Arbitration 
 
¶28.  The Arbitration Act of 1995 gives recognition to 
the New York Convention on recognition and 
enforcement of foreign arbitral awards.  Arbitral 
awards made abroad are now enforceable in Sri Lanka. 
Similarly, awards made in Sri Lanka are enforceable 
abroad.  A center for arbitration known as the 
Institute for the Development of Commercial Law and 
Practice (ICLP) has been established in Colombo, for 
the expeditious, economical and private settlement of 
commercial disputes.  The ICLP appears unlikely to 
become involved in disputes involving the Sri Lankan 
Government, the source of most disputes involving US 
companies in recent years.  Sri Lanka's first 
commercial mediation center was established in 2000, 
and became operational in mid 2001.  Commercial 
mediation is conducted under the Commercial Mediation 
Act.  Interest in mediation is still low. 
 
¶29.  The Labor Department has a process involving 
labor tribunals for settling industrial disputes with 
labor, and compulsory arbitration is available when 
attempts to reconcile industrial disputes fail.  The 
Parliament has passed an amendment to the Industrial 
Disputes Act to expedite labor dispute resolution 
through the Labor Tribunals of the Department of 
Labor.  The Labor Commissioner typically becomes 
involved in labor-management mediation.  The Labor 
Minister, and even the President, has intervened in 
particularly difficult cases. 
 
Investment Disputes Involving U.S. Companies 
 
¶30.  There have been some troublesome investment and 
investment-related commercial disputes involving US 
companies in recent years.  One such dispute, 
involving an alleged expropriation, was resolved in 
1998 after 17 years of on-and-off negotiations 
between the company, the Government of Sri Lanka and 
the US Embassy. 
¶31.  A partially US-owned Internet service provider 
became involved in a major dispute in 1999 when its 
new "enhanced voice" service competed successfully 
with the national telecom service provider, Sri Lanka 
Telecom (SLT).  Though the company had a valid 
license to provide enhanced voice service, SLT and 
the Government of Sri Lanka effectively blocked its 
implementation.  Additional harassment and baseless 
charges were brought against one company employee, 
though intervention by the U.S. Embassy led to some 
respite.  Changes in the Telecommunications 
Regulatory Commission under the new government have 
resulted in the resolution of many, though not all, 
of this company's difficulties.  SLT still retains 
much control over telecom operations.  The Sri Lankan 
government subsequently opened international 
telephony in early 2003 to all telecom technologies, 
though interconnection problems plague operators. 
 
¶32.  In another case, the Sri Lankan Supreme Court in 
May 2000 effectively blocked an existing investment 
agreement between the Government of Sri Lanka and a 
US mining company.  Although the investment agreement 
was already signed and approved by the Sri Lankan 
cabinet, work on the project had not yet begun.  A 
group of citizens filed a fundamental rights case, 
which under Sri Lankan law goes directly to the 
Supreme Court.  The plaintiffs alleged in this case 
that their rights would be violated by implementation 
of the mining project, and the court upheld their 
complaint.  Without any technical argument, the Court 
ruled that the project could not proceed before 
completion of a new series of detailed and highly 
comprehensive and expensive studies, some of which 
appear to be technically impractical.  Because this 
is a Supreme Court decision, options for reversing 
the decision appear limited. 
 
¶33.  Another US investor with a substantial 
investment in an export manufacturing company has 
faced lengthy delays in a court case over a large 
insurance claim.  The company instituted legal action 
in June 1999 and court proceedings are still ongoing 
with the company suffering financial losses as a 
result.  In many disputes, defendants resort to 
obtaining injunctions, stay orders or postponements 
to drag cases on for years. 
 
Performance Requirements/Incentives 
----------------------------------- 
 
Performance Requirements 
 
¶34.  The Board of Investment specifies certain 
minimum investment amounts for both local and foreign 
investors to qualify for incentives.  Firms enjoying 
preferential incentives in the manufacturing sector 
in most cases are required to export 80 percent of 
production, while those in the service sector must 
export at least 70 percent of production.  Sri Lanka 
complies with WTO Trade Related Investment Measures 
(TRIMS) Obligations. 
 
¶35.  Foreign investment is encouraged in information 
technology, electronic assembly, light engineering, 
automobile parts and accessories manufacture, 
industrial and IT parks, rubber based industries, 
information and communication services, tourism and 
leisure related activities, agriculture and agro 
processing, port related services, regional operating 
headquarters and infrastructure projects.  Foreign 
investors are generally not expected to reduce their 
equity over time or to transfer technology within a 
specified period of time, except for build-own- 
transfer or other projects in which such terms are 
clearly specified. 
 
¶36.  Maintaining a certain level of employment is a 
condition in some BOI-approved enterprises.  In 
addition, privatization agreements as a rule prohibit 
new owners from laying off workers, although the 
owners are free to offer voluntary retirement 
packages to reduce their workforce.  Some foreign 
investors have received political pressure to hire 
workers from a particular constituency or a given 
list, but have successfully resisted such pressure 
with no apparent adverse effects. 
¶37.  Foreign investors who make an equity investment 
of $50,000 can qualify for a resident visa. 
Employment of foreign personnel is permitted when 
there is a demonstrated shortage of qualified local 
labor.  Technical and managerial personnel are in 
short supply, and this shortage is likely to continue 
in the near future.  Foreign employees attached to 
BOI-approved companies usually receive preferential 
tax treatment and do not experience significant 
problems in obtaining work or residence permits. 
 
Investment Incentives 
 
¶38.  The Board of Investment has announced the 
following investment incentives: 
 
¶39.  Incentive Program I 
 
Qualifying industries: 
-- Non traditional manufacturing exports (excluding 
tea, rubber and coconut), and companies supplying to 
exporting companies.  Minimum investment of $150,000; 
-- Export oriented services.  Minimum investment of 
$150,000; 
-- Manufacture of industrial tools and/or machinery. 
Minimum investment of  $150,000; 
-- Small scale infrastructure.  Minimum investment of 
$500,000; 
-- Research and development.  Minimum investment of 
$50,000; 
-- Agriculture and agro processing industries. 
Minimum investment of $10,000; 
 
Incentives:  Above industries will qualify for a 
five-year tax holiday initially.  A preferential tax 
of 10 percent in the 6th and 7th years follows the 
tax holiday.  After the 7th year, a preferential tax 
of 15-20 percent will apply.  In addition, these 
industries qualify for duty-free imports (generally, 
during the life of the project for export-oriented 
projects, and during the project implementation 
period for others).  Exporting companies and export- 
oriented services will be exempted from exchange 
control regulations.  They will also qualify for free 
repatriation of profits and dividends and free 
transferability of shares. 
 
¶40.  Incentive Program II 
 
Qualifying Industries: 
-- Information technology services such as call 
centers, data entry services, data centers, software 
development, hosting centers of e-governance related 
projects (a); 
-- IT training institutes (b); 
-- Regional operating headquarters providing 
following services to related businesses outside Sri 
Lanka:  sourcing raw materials, R&D, technical 
support, financial and treasury management, marketing 
and sales promotion; 
-- Any industrial, agriculture, service, or 
construction activity approved by the BOI.  Minimum 
investment of $5 million. 
 
(a)Minimum employment of 15 IT professionals is 
required in IT companies 
 (b) Minimum 300 students required for IT training 
institutes. 
 
Incentives:  Above industries will qualify for a 3- 
year tax holiday period initially.  A preferential 
tax of 10 percent will apply in the 4th and 5th 
years.  From 6th year onwards a preferential tax of 
15-20 percent will apply.  In addition, capital goods 
will be exempted from import duty. 
 
Infrastructure development: 
 
¶41.  Companies acquiring existing companies in 
petroleum, power generation, transmission, 
development of highways, sea ports, airports, 
railway, water services, public transport, 
agriculture and agro processing and other 
infrastructure projects approved by the Finance 
Minister.  Minimum investment of $12.5 million. 
 
¶42.  The above projects will qualify for tax holidays 
ranging from 5 to 10 years depending on the magnitude 
of investment.  A preferential tax of 15 percent will 
follow the tax holiday.  They will also qualify for 
duty free imports of capital goods. 
 
¶43.  Large-scale infrastructure projects in power 
generation, transmission and distribution; 
development of highways, seaports, airports, public 
transport and water services; establishment of 
industrial parks, and other infrastructure projects 
approved by the BOI.  Minimum investment of $10 
million. 
 
¶44.  The above investments will qualify for tax 
holidays ranging from 6 to 12 years depending on the 
size of the investment.  A preferential tax of 15 
percent will follow the tax holiday.  They will also 
qualify for duty free imports of capital goods. 
 
Indo-Lanka Free Trade Agreement 
 
¶45.  A preferential trade agreement, Indo Lanka Free 
Trade Agreement (ILFTA) (www.indolankafta.org), 
between Sri Lanka and India is in operation.  Under 
this agreement, most products manufactured in Sri 
Lanka, with at least 35 percent domestic value 
addition (if raw materials are imported from India, 
domestic value addition required is only 25 percent), 
qualify for duty free entry to the Indian market. 
Tariff concessions for Sri Lankan products include 
zero tariffs on 4,150 items;  50 to 75 percent 
reduction for tea and garments under quota; 25 
percent reduction for 528 items, and no reduction for 
429 items (negative list).  The two countries have 
begun discussions on services sector liberalization, 
although no specific goals have been set yet. 
 
¶46.  Sri Lanka also hopes to sign free trade 
agreements with Pakistan soon. These are seen as 
steps towards making Sri Lanka a regional hub and the 
gateway to South Asia and Middle East for foreign 
investors. 
 
Prospects for U.S. Investment Under Indo Lanka Free 
Trade Agreement (ILFTA) 
 
¶47.  Foreign investors in Sri Lanka can enjoy 
preferential access to the Indian market, under the 
ILFTA.  Domestic value addition of 35 percent is 
required to qualify for concessions granted under the 
agreement.  The BOI hopes to attract foreign joint 
ventures to Sri Lanka under the ILFTA.  Indian 
imports amounted to over $49 billion in 2002.  The 
BOI's strategy is to identify products imported into 
India and to target its investment promotion efforts 
to countries and companies manufacturing them.  The 
US is one such country; the US accounts for about 7.5 
percent of Indian imports valued at $3.7 billion in 
¶2002.  A majority of these products would qualify for 
substantial duty concessions if exported from Sri 
Lanka under the ILFTA.  The BOI encourages US 
manufacturing companies and regional operating 
headquarters to relocate in Sri Lanka to benefit from 
ILFTA.  The BOI has identified the following sectors 
for investment promotion in the US:  electronics, 
light engineering, pharmaceuticals/cosmetics, 
information technology and financial services. 
 
¶48.  For further information on investment incentives 
and other investment-related issues, potential 
investors are encouraged to contact the Board of 
Investment directly.  The BOI can be found at 
www.boi.lk, or reached via e-mail at info@boi.lk 
 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶49.  Private entities are free to establish, acquire 
and dispose of interests in business enterprises. 
Private enterprises enjoy benefits similar to those 
granted to public enterprises, and there are no known 
limitations on access to markets, credit or licenses. 
Foreign ownership is allowed in most sectors. 
Private land ownership is limited to fifty acres per 
person.  About 80 percent of the land in Sri Lanka is 
owned by the Government, including most tea, rubber 
and coconut plantations.  In the past three and a 
half years, the Government divested most of these 
plantations to the private sector on 50-year lease 
terms as part of ongoing privatization efforts. 
Although state land for industrial use is usually 
allotted on a 50-year lease, 99-year leases may also 
be approved on a case-by-case basis, depending on the 
nature of the project. 
 
¶50.  Foreign investors can purchase land from private 
sellers.  The Government removed a 100 percent tax on 
land transfers to foreigners in March 2002. 
 
Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------- 
 
Property rights 
 
¶51.  Secured interests in property are recognized and 
enforced.  A fairly reliable registration system 
exists for recording private property such as land, 
buildings and mortgages.  The legal system is 
nondiscriminatory and protects and facilitates 
acquisition and disposition of property rights by 
foreigners. 
 
¶52.  Private farmers are working state-owned lands 
under varying tenure agreements, ranging from 
restrictive tenures to land grants.  These lands have 
ill-defined property rights.  A World Bank-funded 
project is underway to develop a legal framework for 
implementing a titling system for land.  This will 
also remove restrictions related to the sale, leasing 
and transfer and mortgaging of rural lands previously 
distributed to farmers. 
 
 
Intellectual Property Rights Protection 
 
¶53.  Sri Lanka is a party to major Intellectual 
Property Agreements including the Berne Convention 
for the protection of literary and artistic works, 
the Paris Convention for the protection of industrial 
property, the Madrid Agreement for the repression of 
false or deceptive indication of source on goods, the 
Nairobi Treaty, the Patent Co-operation Treaty, the 
Universal Copyright Convention and the Convention 
establishing the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO).  Sri Lanka's intellectual 
property law is based on the WIPO model law for 
developing countries.  Sri Lanka and the US signed a 
Bilateral Agreement for the Protection of 
Intellectual Property Rights in 1991, and Sri Lanka 
is also a party to the Trade Related Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement in the World Trade 
Organization. 
 
¶54.  In July 2003, the Sri Lankan Parliament passed a 
new intellectual property law to replace the 
Intellectual Property Act of 1979.  The new law is 
expected to come into force in August 2003 and will 
meet both US-Sri Lanka bilateral IPR agreement and 
TRIPS obligations (due on January 1, 2000), to a 
great extent.  The law will govern copyrights and 
related rights, industrial designs, patents for 
inventions, trademarks and service marks, trade 
names, layout designs of integrated circuits, 
geographical indications, unfair competition and 
undisclosed information.  All trademarks, designs, 
industrial designs and patents must be registered 
with the Director General of Intellectual Property. 
 
¶55.  Infringement of Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPR) is a punishable offense under the new law. 
Intellectual Property Rights come under both criminal 
and civil jurisdiction.  Relief available to owners 
under the new law includes injunctive relief, seizure 
and destruction of infringing goods and plates or 
implements used for the making of infringing copies, 
and prohibition of importation and exports. 
Enforcement, however, is a serious problem, as is 
public awareness of IPR.  Domestic implementing 
legislation, under the old law, has been very weak 
and the Government does not act as an enforcer of IPR 
laws.  At present, aggrieved parties must, on their 
own, seek redress of any IPR violation through the 
courts, which can be a frustrating and time-consuming 
process.  Although the legal system is well- 
established and non-discriminatory, it is fraught 
with long delays. 
 
¶56.  It will take time before new procedures and 
court precedents are established.  In addition, Sri 
Lanka needs to ratify and conform to the WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) and the 
WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT).  Ratification of these 
two treaties will support electronic commerce, 
protect the rights of performers and producers of 
phonograms and the rights of authors in their 
literary and artistic works, and offer an adequate 
basis to fight international piracy in view of the 
new technological developments.  Meanwhile, local 
agents of reputed US and other international 
recording companies, software development companies 
and motion picture companies continue to complain 
that lack of IPR protection is damaging their 
businesses.  The Embassy, along with key industry 
players including the IFPI, continues to lobby the 
Government to improve Sri Lanka's IPR regime. 
 
¶57.  Patents are granted for inventions, with the 
following exceptions:  discoveries, scientific 
theories and mathematical methods, plant or animal 
varieties (other than micro biological processes) and 
essentially biological processes for the production 
of plants and animals (other than non biological and 
microbiological processes), business rules and 
methods, methods of treatment by surgery or therapy, 
and diagnostic methods practiced on the human or 
animal body.  The new law will also permit compulsory 
licensing and parallel imports of pharmaceutical 
products.  The compulsory licensing will allow 
government to grant licenses to manufacture certain 
drugs, overruling patent licenses, in a national 
emergency.  The parallel imports will allow the 
import of a branded drug from an alternative source. 
A patent is valid for 20 years from the date of 
grant, but must be renewed annually. 
 
¶58.  Copyrights are not registered.  A work is 
protected automatically by operation of law. 
Original literary, artistic, and scientific works 
including computer programs and databases are 
protected under the new law. The enforcement 
limitations described above apply to copyrights, 
including software. 
 
¶59.  Sri Lanka recognizes both trademarks and service 
marks.  The exclusive right to a mark is acquired by 
registration.  A mark may consist of words, slogans, 
designs, etc.  Protection also is available to well 
known marks not registered in Sri Lanka.  Registered 
trademarks are valid for ten years. 
Transparency of the Regulatory System 
------------------------------------- 
¶60.  The BOI strives to inform potential investors 
about laws and regulations that may affect operations 
in Sri Lanka.  Laws pertaining to tax, labor and 
labor standards, exchange controls, customs, 
environmental norms, building and construction 
standards are in place.  Some of the laws and 
regulations are not freely available and are 
difficult to access.  Foreign and domestic investors 
often complain that the regulatory system allows far 
too much leeway for bureaucratic discretion. 
Outdated regulations and rigid administrative 
procedures imposed by public sector institutions have 
been identified as impediments to private sector 
growth.  Effective enforcement mechanisms are 
sometimes lacking and coordination problems between 
the BOI and relevant line agencies frequently emerge. 
Lethargy and indifference on the part of mid- and 
lower-level public servants compound transparency 
problems.  Non-availability of technical capacity 
within the Government to review financial proposals 
for private infrastructure projects also creates 
problems during tendering.  The Government has begun 
to carry out extensive deregulation to facilitate 
private sector activity. 
 
¶61.  Although many foreign investors, including US 
firms, have had positive experiences in Sri Lanka, 
some have encountered significant problems with 
government practices and regulations.  For example, 
one foreign company that had obtained a waiver of a 
particular requirement in order to obtain a license 
was later told it must meet the requirement to 
continue to be qualified for the license, with no 
advance warning and little justification.  Some 
multinational firms have experienced extensive 
unexplained delays in trying to reach agreement on 
investment projects.  Others have had contracts 
inexplicably canceled without compensation, even 
after those contracts had been approved by the Sri 
Lankan Cabinet. 
 
¶62.  The partially US-owned Internet service provider 
mentioned above encountered further difficulties in 
1999 when its "enhanced voice" service competed 
successfully with Sri Lanka Telecom (SLT) which is 
partly owned by the Government.  The company had a 
valid license to offer enhanced voice service, but 
SLT claimed otherwise.  Although technical questions 
regarding the interpretation of licenses should in 
theory be resolved by the industry regulatory 
authority, this option was less attractive to the 
company because the Director General of the 
Regulatory Authority at that time was in this case a 
former CEO of SLT with a bias towards SLT.   This 
problem was partially resolved in 2002 with the 
appointment of a new Telecom Regulator and in 2003, 
when the government fully liberalized the external 
gateway operations.   Implementation and enforcement 
of the new regulations is inconsistent. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Availability of financial resources 
 
¶63.  Retained profits finance about 70 percent of 
private investment, with short term borrowing 
financing a further 20 percent of investment.  The 
stock market and corporate securities market have not 
been significantly used to raise capital.  FDI 
finances about 4 percent of investment. 
¶64.  The State consumes over 50 percent of the 
country's domestic financial resources, and has a 
virtual monopoly on the management and use of long 
term savings in the country.  This inhibits the free 
flow of financial resources to product and factor 
markets.  In the past, high interest rate volatility 
due to excessive use of short term borrowing by the 
state increased intermediation cost leading to higher 
costs to other borrowers.  The current government has 
initiated a low interest rate regime and has begun to 
replace short-term government debt with long-term 
debt.  Together with lower inflation and improved 
government fiscal discipline this contributed to 
lower interest rates during the past 18 months.  The 
Central Bank has decreased its key monetary policy 
rates significantly during this period.  The prime 
lending rate currently averages 10.36 percent 
compared with about 21.5 percent in December 2000. 
Foreign investors are allowed to access credit on the 
local market.  They are also free to raise foreign 
currency loans. 
 
¶65.  In 2002, there was a revival in the Colombo 
stock market.  A total of Rs 4.0 billion (approx. $42 
million) was raised in the primary market by way of 
new equity and debt, reflecting the potential for 
companies to raise funds through the market.  Due to 
economic and political problems and depressed stock 
market conditions, capital raised in the primary 
market was extremely low during 1999-2001. 
 
¶66.  The International Finance Corporation (IFC), the 
arm of the World Bank group which invests in the 
private sector, also provides equity and debt 
financing for private sector ventures in Sri Lanka 
such as infrastructure, financial markets, tourism, 
IT, healthcare and education as well as general 
manufacturing and services.  The IFC's current 
portfolio in Sri Lanka is about $75 million. 
 
Credit Instruments 
 
¶67.  Commercial banks and two development finance 
institutions, the National Development Bank (NDB) and 
the Development Finance Corporation of Ceylon Bank 
(DFCC), are the principal source of bank finance. 
Bank loans are the most widely used credit instrument 
for the private sector.  Financial institutions such 
as the DFCC and some commercial banks also raise 
syndicated bank loans to fund large-scale investment 
projects undertaken by the private sector. 
 
¶68.  The domestic debt market in Sri Lanka is still 
at a very nascent stage.  A few leading companies and 
financial institutions have raised capital through 
credit instruments such as debentures, corporate 
bonds and commercial paper.  In the past, high 
interest rates on government bonds due to excessive 
government borrowing have made it unprofitable for 
private companies to raise capital through corporate 
bonds.  This situation is set to change with the 
current relatively low interest rates on government 
bonds.  In 2002, Rs 2.7 billion ($27.8 million) was 
raised through listed debentures. Corporate debt of 
both publicly listed companies and companies not 
listed on the stock exchange are traded through the 
stock exchange.  Fitch IBRC (formerly Duff and Phelps 
Credit Rating Company) which opened an office in 
Colombo in 1999, is the only credit rating agency in 
Sri Lanka.  The local branch company, Fitch Rating 
Lanka Ltd, is a joint venture between Fitch IBRC, 
IFC, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and several local 
financial institutions.  Fitch Lanka rates debt 
instruments of corporations, banks and other 
financial institutions in accordance with 
international rating standards.  But a strong credit 
rating culture has not yet developed in Sri Lanka. 
This is set to change as the government has made 
credit ratings mandatory for all deposit taking 
institutions from January 2004.  Credit ratings are 
also mandatory for all varieties of debt instruments. 
Accounting Standards 
 
¶69.  There is an active and relatively competent 
accounting profession, based on the British model. 
The source of accounting standards is the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (ICASL) and 
standards are constantly updated to reflect current 
international accounting and audit standards.  Due to 
the lack of an adequate enforcement mechanism, 
however, problems with the quality and reliability of 
financial statements exist.  Sri Lanka carried out a 
major revision of accounting and auditing standards 
in September 1997.  Since then, the standards have 
been periodically updated to meet new international 
standards adopted by the International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB).  As of mid 2003, there were 
five new international standards awaiting adoption in 
Sri Lanka. 
 
¶70.  Sri Lanka accounting standards are applicable 
for all banks and companies listed on the stock 
exchange and all other large- and medium-sized 
companies in Sri Lanka.  Accounts of such business 
enterprises are required to be audited by 
professionally qualified auditors holding ICASL 
membership.  ICASL has recently published accounting 
standards for small companies as well.  Companies in 
Sri Lanka now have the choice of adopting 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) of 
the IASB.  An Accounting Standards and Monitoring 
Board (ASMB) which started operations in April 2000, 
is responsible for monitoring compliance with Sri 
Lanka accounting and auditing standards.  In 2001, 
the ASMB has reviewed financial statements of 397 
companies and found major deviations in 9 percent of 
the financial statements. 
 
Securities Exchange Commission 
 
¶71.  The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
regulates the securities market in Sri Lanka.  The 
SEC law was revised in 2003, enhancing its coverage 
and investigative powers.  The SEC now covers stock 
exchanges, unit trusts, stock brokers, listed public 
companies, margin traders, underwriters, investment 
managers, credit rating agencies and securities 
depositories. 
 
¶72.  Foreign investors can freely purchase up to 100 
percent of equity in Sri Lankan companies in numerous 
permitted sectors.  In order to facilitate portfolio 
investments, country funds and regional funds are 
also allowed to invest in Sri Lanka's stock market; 
such funds must first receive Ministry of Finance 
approval to operate in Sri Lanka.  These funds make 
transactions through share investment external rupee 
accounts maintained in commercial banks. 
 
¶73.  Sri Lanka's SEC was rocked by a scandal in early 
2003, tarnishing the image of the market watchdog. 
The SEC Chairman and another leading businessman were 
implicated for insider dealing at a blue chip local 
conglomerate where they were both directors.  Initial 
attempts by the SEC secretariat to institute legal 
actions against the two were blocked by the SEC Board 
of Directors.  Later, the Attorney General ruled that 
the SEC Board had acted improperly, casting doubt on 
the board members' credibility.  Since then, the SEC 
Chairman has resigned.  He has pleaded innocent and 
has filed legal action, opposing SEC decision to 
prosecute.  The SEC is awaiting a decision on this 
case to proceed with legal action.  The SEC Director 
General, who was instrumental in pursuing the case, 
also resigned, citing unwarranted interference by the 
SEC board of directors to stop investigations. 
 
¶74.  The SEC scandal has caused many to call for 
increased corporate governance and accountability in 
the private sector.  Some business consultants have 
asked for laws such as the recent US Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act to regulate financial services and professional 
services organizations. 
Colombo Stock Exchange 
 
¶75.  The Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), while small by 
"big emerging market" standards, is one of the most 
efficient in the region.  The CSE is fully automated, 
with automated trading and clearing and settlement 
systems.  The CSE has a rolling settlement period of 
five days for buyers and six days for sellers. 
Fifteen local and foreign joint venture brokers 
currently operate at the CSE.  Foreign stock-brokers 
are permitted to hold up to 100 percent equity in 
stock broking firms operating at the CSE.  SEC has a 
settlement guarantee fund with an initial capital of 
Rs 100 million ($1 million) which aims to guarantee 
the settlement of trades between clearing members of 
the exchange.  The Chartered Financial Analysts (CFA) 
program is conducted in Sri Lanka. 
 
¶76.  Acquisition of companies through mergers and 
takeovers is governed by the Takeovers and Mergers 
Code of 1995 made under the Securities and Exchange 
Commission of Sri Lanka Act.  This law applies only 
to companies listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange. 
Acquisition of more than a 30 percent stake of a 
listed company requires the buyer to make an offer to 
all other shareholders.  There are 240 companies 
listed on the stock exchange.  The articles of 
association of a few listed companies restrict 
foreign equity to certain levels. 
 
¶77. In mid-2003, CSE was one of the best performing 
markets in the world.  In June 2003, the stock market 
hit an all time high.  The cease-fire agreement 
between the Government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE and 
economic reforms has helped to boost investor 
confidence.  During 1998-2001, the Colombo Stock 
Market experienced a sharp downturn due to a variety 
of local and international factors.  The CSE was 
removed from the Morgan Stanley Capital International 
(MSCI) Index in 2001 due to a drop in market 
capitalization and liquidity.  The CSE hopes to get 
reclassified in the MSCI soon.  The single overriding 
factor inhibiting the sustainable development of the 
stock market has been the conflict in the North and 
East and its effect on investor confidence and the 
economy as a whole.  Other broader issues include 
lack of liquidity and limited market size. 
Improvements are also needed in corporate governance, 
accountability and public disclosure in companies. 
The Accounting and Auditing Standards Monitoring 
Board, the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, the Colombo 
Stock Exchange and professional accounting bodies are 
taking initiatives in these areas. 
 
Banking System 
 
¶78.  Sri Lanka has a fairly well diversified banking 
system.  There are 23 commercial banks, consisting of 
eleven local banks and twelve foreign banks.  In 
addition, there are thirteen local specialized banks. 
The banking sector moved towards consolidation in 
2001-2002 as four foreign commercial banks, ABN Amro, 
Nova Scotia, Habib Bank AG Zurich and American 
Express left Sri Lanka after selling their 
operations.  Citibank NA is the only US bank 
operating in Sri Lanka and has expanded its 
operations recently.  In 2002, the American Express 
Bank sold its banking operations in Colombo in 
keeping with its global strategy.  Sri Lanka 
experienced its first bank failure in December 2002, 
when the Central Bank took action to revoke the 
license of a small licensed specialized bank as its 
financial condition deteriorated to insolvency. 
There has not been any fallout for other banks from 
this incident as of June 2003.  At the request of the 
Central Bank, two other small troubled commercial 
banks are being taken over by larger banks.  Sri 
Lanka's banking sector has various outdated 
regulations that restrict banking sector 
consolidation.  The Government is proposing to amend 
the Banking Act to further facilitate mergers and 
acquisitions in the banking sector in a strategy to 
help consolidation.  Further, the Government has 
launched an extensive financial sector reforms 
program, which is set to overhaul the financial 
sector to suit modern times. 
 
¶79.  The Central Bank is responsible for supervision 
of all banking institutions.  Wide-ranging 
improvements have been made in banking regulation and 
in public disclosure of banking sector performance. 
In 1997, the Central Bank issued, for the first time, 
directives on loan classification, suspension of 
interest, provisioning, investments in equity, and 
the acquisition of immovable property, and it 
tightened its directives on capital adequacy and 
single borrowers.  Subsequently, the Central Bank has 
expanded its reporting system to monitor compliance. 
Standards for the public disclosure of banking sector 
data were raised considerably in 1999.  With the 
exception of classification and provisioning, all 
Central Bank requirements are up to international 
standards.  In 2002, the Monetary Law Act (MLA) was 
amended to provide Central Bank broader supervisory 
powers and greater independence.  It also contained 
improvements to the payment and settlement systems. 
The bank also commenced additional training programs 
for bank supervision staff and introduced more on- 
site and off-site surveillance during the year.  The 
Central Bank also issued a code of corporate 
governance for banks and financial institutions in 
¶2002. 
 
¶80.  Despite recent progress, bank supervision 
remains weak.  Central Bank supervision as well as 
auditing practices of private audit firms came under 
criticism after the recent specialized bank failure 
mentioned above.  The Central Bank is planning to 
obtain the services of an international expert to 
strengthen bank supervision in 2003.   In addition, 
the Government is proposing to introduce amendments 
to the Banking Act to enhance Central Bank's 
supervision capacity (including fit and proper tests 
of new entrants and penal violations for violation of 
prudential laws).  Further amendments to the MLA are 
also expected in the next two years under ongoing 
financial and legal reforms programs. 
 
State Owned Banks 
 
¶81.  Total assets of the commercial banks stood at Rs 
788 billion ($8.1 billion) as of December 31, 2002. 
Despite a gradual loss in market share, the two 
state-owned commercial banks, Bank of Ceylon and 
People's Bank with assets of Rs 228 billion and Rs 
180 billion, respectively, still dominate banking, 
making up a little over half of all assets and 
liabilities.  The state banks are weak, with high 
NPLs, inadequate loan loss provisioning, low 
equity/assets ratio.  Much of that is due to past 
government interference.  Since most of the bad debt 
of the two banks is implicitly guaranteed by the 
state, these problems do not affect the credibility 
of the banking system in Sri Lanka. 
 
¶82.  The weaknesses in the state banks, however, make 
it possible for other inefficient banks to operate 
and for the more efficient banks to make higher 
profits than they would otherwise.  The World Bank 
and IMF have identified the dominance of the 
inefficient state banks as a main constraint for 
development of the financial sector.  In a bid to 
overcome the problems at the state-owned banks, the 
Government has been trying to reorganize the banks 
since mid 1998.  Both banks have launched 
restructuring exercises to return to commercial 
viability in the medium term. Top management at both 
Bank of Ceylon and People's Bank now contains members 
from the business community and experienced bankers 
from the private sector.  Corporate governance 
practices in the state banks, however, remain 
questionable. 
¶83.  Bank of Ceylon met most of the World Bank 
established restructuring targets by end 2002, 
including loan recovery and return on assets.  The 
situation at People's Bank, however, remains grave. 
Although the People's Bank strengthened its financial 
position, reflecting increased recoveries and higher 
margins and posted a profit in 2002, the Bank is 
insolvent.  The Government has agreed on the urgent 
need for the restructuring of the Peoples Bank under 
the PRGF with the IMF.  As a first option, the 
Government has set a December 2003 target to sell the 
Bank as a single unit, after transferring problem 
loans to an asset management company.  If this fails, 
it is proposed to separate the bank into a savings 
and commercial bank-the former remaining under the 
government and the latter divested.  In either case, 
the Government aims to complete the restructuring by 
March 2004. 
 
Private Commercial Banks and foreign banks 
 
¶84.  Private commercial banks and foreign banks 
operating in Sri Lanka generally follow more prudent 
credit policies and as a group are in better 
financial shape.  Banking sector profits increased 
quite sharply in 2002 after suffering badly in 2001 
due to the economic slowdown.  Nonetheless, the 
private banking sector also remains trapped with a 
high level of non-performing loans, despite high 
margins.  In 2002, the average rate of non-performing 
loans to total loans was 19 percent for the two state 
commercial banks, 15.3 percent for private domestic 
banks and 12.1 percent for foreign banks operating in 
Sri Lanka.  There are concerns regarding inadequate 
loan loss provisioning and low operational efficiency 
in some local private banks.  Foreign banks tend to 
make provisions in line with international best 
practices as most foreign bank branches are subject 
to home country supervision in addition to that of 
the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.   To help improve bank 
performance, an Asset Management Company Law is being 
prepared with World Bank and IMF assistance.  The law 
aims to provide troubled banks with a mechanism to 
effectively deal with their non-performing loans. 
 
¶85.  Credit ratings will become mandatory for all 
banks operating in Sri Lanka from January 2004. 
Currently, six banks have been assigned ratings by 
Fitch Ratings:  State-owned National Savings Bank:SL 
AAA; Citibank NA, Colombo:SL AAA; Commercial Bank of 
Ceylon:SLAA+,.DFCC Bank:SL AA; Bank of Ceylon:SL AA- 
and Hatton National Bank: SL A. 
 
Capital Adequacy 
 
¶86.  Sri Lanka adopted capital adequacy standards set 
by the Basel Committee on banking regulations and 
supervisory practices in 1993.  The Central Bank has 
raised the minimum capital adequacy standards from 
4.5 to 5 percent for core capital (Tier I) and from 9 
to 10 percent for risk weighted assets (Tier I and 
Tier II) from January 2003.  Further enhancing 
banking sector stability, Central Bank has also 
imposed capital adequacy standards on foreign 
currency banking units from June 30, 2003. 
 
¶87.  The two state owned banks' risk based capital 
asset ratio (CA) at 0.3 percent was well below the 
minimum in 2002.  For private domestic banks, CA 
averaged 9.3.  The foreign banks comfortably met the 
requirement at 36.6 percent. 
Political Violence 
------------------ 
 
¶88.  Since early 2002, there has been a marked 
improvement in the business climate due to the 
peaceful atmosphere prevailing in the country.  This 
is in contrast to the period between 1983-2001, when 
the country was plagued by ethnic conflict, a civil 
war and related urban terrorism.  The fighting 
between the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) 
and the Sri Lankan military was primarily in northern 
and eastern Sri Lanka, but other parts of the country 
suffered sporadic terrorist attacks.  Since 1997, the 
LTTE has been on the State Department list of foreign 
terrorist organizations.  Terrorist activities of the 
LTTE have declined significantly since late 2001 when 
the LTTE declared a unilateral cease-fire and  signed 
a formal open-ended cease-fire agreement on February 
22, 2002 with the hope of ending the war.  The two 
parties have held six rounds of peace talks with the 
government of Norway acting as facilitator.  The 
LTTE, which temporarily suspended its participation 
in the peace talks in April 2003 was giving signals 
of returning to the talks as of July 2003.  Although 
several ceasefire violations have been recorded, the 
enduring ceasefire in Sri Lanka has increased 
investor confidence and has allowed the government 
and private sector to embark on new investment and 
business initiatives.  There are no guarantees that 
the process will succeed in ending the years of 
conflict, but optimism is stronger than at any time 
in the past decade. 
 
¶89.  During the almost 19 years of war, tourists and 
foreign business representatives have not been 
terrorist targets but have suffered collateral injury 
during attacks on other targets.  On July 24, 2001 
the LTTE attacked the International Airport and 
destroyed both commercial and military aircraft. 
Several military personnel were killed in the attack, 
military and airport employees were injured, and 
civilians were caught in crossfire.  Sri Lankan 
Airlines, jointly owned by the Government of Sri 
Lanka and Emirates Airlines of Dubai, lost several 
commercial aircraft in the attack.   The LTTE has 
also attacked several commercial ships flying foreign 
flags in the waters off the north and east of the 
country.  In response to these attacks, insurers 
imposed war risk insurance surcharges on aircraft and 
ships using Sri Lankan seaports and airports.  These 
surcharges have since been lifted.  During the 
conflict, the LTTE also detonated several large bombs 
in Colombo's financial and business districts causing 
extensive damage to life and property.  Very few 
foreigners were injured in these terrorist incidents 
due to the LTTE's policy of targeting local 
interests.  There have been no major attacks since 
the peace process began on December 24, 2001.  In 
recent months (April-July 2003), however, the LTTE is 
implicated in the slayings of several anti-LTTE 
politicians of Tamil heritage.  There have also been 
several violent incidents at sea. 
 
¶90.  In 1998, the US Peace Corps suspended operations 
in Sri Lanka after LTTE bombings occurred outside the 
Colombo area, including places such as Galle in the 
south and Kandy in the central highlands -- locations 
where volunteers had been posted, based on the low 
probability of terrorist attacks.  There are efforts 
by the current government to bring the Peace Corps 
back and a Peace Corps assessment team is expected in 
September. 
 
Corruption 
---------- 
 
¶91.  The country has fairly adequate laws and 
regulations to combat corruption, but they are 
unevenly enforced. US firms identify corruption as a 
constraint on foreign investment, but, by and large, 
it is not a major threat to operating in Sri Lanka. 
Corruption is a persistent problem in customs 
clearance and enables wide-scale smuggling of certain 
consumer items, to the detriment of legitimate 
manufacturers and importers.  Corruption appears to 
have the greatest effect on investors in large 
projects as well as government procurement and 
tendering, especially in previous defense purchases. 
The law states that giving or accepting a bribe is a 
criminal offense and carries a maximum sentence of 
seven years imprisonment and a fine at the discretion 
of the courts.  The Bribery Commission is the main 
body responsible for investigating allegations of 
bribery and corruption.  The function of the Bribery 
Commission, under Act No 19 of 1994, is to 
investigate allegations brought to its attention and 
institute proceedings against responsible individuals 
in the appropriate court.  The commission was 
appointed for a 5-year term in December 1999 but has 
not been effective in dealing with bribery or 
corruption.  As of June 2003, this commission was not 
functioning, due to the failure of the Constitutional 
Council to fill a vacancy caused by the death of one 
of the three commissioners. 
 
¶92.  Few have been found guilty of corruption in 
recent years.  Highly publicized efforts to 
investigate bribery and corruption have failed, 
damaging public confidence in such processes.  During 
the latter part of previous Government's term, 
corruption charges were leveled against politicians 
and top officials in charge of key government 
corporations, but no politician has been prosecuted 
for bribery or corruption.  In 2002, the Criminal 
Investigation Department raided bank vaults of a 
former senior cabinet minister and discovered a large 
cache of certificates of deposits for millions of 
rupees.  The Bribery Commission is investigating this 
case.  In April 2001, the Chairman of the Board of 
Investment was forced to resign on allegations of 
bribery and corruption.  He is currently being 
prosecuted for bribery.  A handful of other key 
government officials, including the former General 
Manager of Railways, are being prosecuted for 
corruption and bribery, but prosecutions are 
proceeding slowly. 
 
¶93.  The current UNF government came into power 
promising a corruption-free regime, but corruption 
allegations continue to surface regularly.  In 
response to various reports of corruption and lack of 
an effective mechanism to handle corruption 
complaints, the ruling United National Party has 
recently appointed an internal party committee to 
investigate corruption allegations of its members. 
The Government is also taking other steps to combat 
corruption.  All tenders presented for Cabinet 
approval now need to be routed through a cabinet 
subcommittee chaired by the Minister of Finance. 
Tender board decisions presented to the subcommittee 
are vetted thoroughly by Treasury officials.  The 
Government has taken additional measures to regulate 
defense spending by appointing a Budget Monitoring 
Committee and a Procurement Monitoring Committee in 
the Defense Ministry. 
 
¶94.  Transparency International (TI), an 
international "watchdog" organization promoting anti- 
corruption strategies, opened a national chapter in 
Sri Lanka in September 1999.  In TI's Corruption 
Perception Index for 2002, Sri Lanka was ranked 52 
among 102 countries with a score of 3.7 out of a 
clean score of 10, reflecting a relatively high 
perceived level of corruption among politicians and 
public officials.  TI has asked the international 
donor community to ensure transparency and clear 
lines of accountability in the disbursement of donor 
aid for post war reconstruction. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------- 
¶95.  The Government of Sri Lanka has signed 
Investment Protection Agreements with the United 
States (which came into force in May 1993) and the 
following countries: 
 
¶1.  Belgium 
¶2.  People's Republic of China 
¶3.  Denmark 
¶4.  Egypt 
¶5.  Finland 
¶6.  France 
¶7.  Germany 
¶8.  Indonesia 
¶9.  India 
¶10. Iran 
¶11. Italy 
¶12. Japan 
¶13. Korea 
¶14. Luxembourg 
¶15. Malaysia 
¶16. Netherlands 
¶17. Norway 
¶18. Romania 
¶19. Singapore 
¶20. Sweden 
¶21. Switzerland 
¶22. Thailand 
¶23. United Kingdom 
 
¶96.  A bilateral treaty on avoidance of double 
taxation between Sri Lanka and United States is 
currently awaiting ratification by both sides. 
 
¶97.  Foreign investors not qualifying for BOI 
incentives such as tax and exchange control 
exemptions or concessions will be liable to pay taxes 
on corporate profits, dividends, and remittance of 
profits.  They will also be liable to pay a Value 
Added Tax on goods and services. The Government has 
also imposed a tax of 0.1 percent on debits to any 
current or savings account maintained at any bank in 
Sri Lanka.  Debits made to accounts of Government and 
international organizations are excluded.  Accounts 
maintained at Foreign Currency Banking Units, 
accounts maintained for stock exchange transactions 
(SIERA) and resident and non-resident foreign 
currency accounts are exempted from the tax.  The 
Embassy encourages prospective US investors to 
contact an international auditing firm operating in 
Sri Lanka to assess their tax liability. 
 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶98.  The US and Sri Lanka concluded in 1966 (and 
renewed in 1993) an agreement that allows the 
Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) to 
provide investment insurance guarantees for US 
investors.  OPIC currently provides coverage to 
banking and power sector investments in Sri Lanka. 
Sri Lanka's membership in the Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) offers the opportunity for 
insurance against non-commercial risks. 
 
¶99.  Over $12 million is spent annually by the US 
Embassy and other US Government institutions in Sri 
Lanka.  This amount can potentially be utilized by 
OPIC to honor an inconvertibility claim; however, no 
such claims have been made to date in Sri Lanka.  The 
Embassy purchases local currency at the financial 
rate.  The Sri Lankan Rupee has been quite stable 
during past 12 months.  The currency is not expected 
to fluctuate by more than 10 percent relative to the 
US dollar over the next year. 
 
Labor 
----- 
Labor Force 
¶100.  Sri Lanka's labor force is literate and 
trainable, although weak in certain technical skills. 
More computer skills training programs are becoming 
available, but the demand still outpaces supply and 
many qualified workers seek employment overseas.  The 
average worker has eight years of schooling.  Two- 
thirds of the labor force is male.  The unemployment 
rate (employment is defined as one who worked for 
pay, profit or unpaid family gain for one or more 
hours during the survey week) in the third quarter of 
2002 was 9.1 percent, with an estimated 641,000 of a 
total labor force of 7.1 million out of work.  (Labor 
force data excludes the North and East; armed forces 
personnel deployed away from home and Sri Lankan 
migrant workers abroad.)  Including unpaid family 
workers, the unemployment rate is 10.0 percent. 
Youth unemployment remains a critical problem. 
Nearly 80 percent of unemployed persons are in the 
15-29 year age range.  Over 50 percent of unemployed 
youth are educated at the O-Level (10th grade) or 
higher. 
 
¶101.  A significant proportion of unemployed seek 
"white collar" jobs, and most sectors facing labor 
shortages offer manual or semi-skilled jobs or 
require technical or professional skills such as 
management, marketing, information technology, 
accountancy and finance, and English language.  The 
Government has recognized the challenge of 
reformulating the educational system to meet the 
needs of the private sector better, but it will take 
time before the mismatch of skills to requirements is 
addressed.  Asian Development Bank and the World Bank 
have recently approved projects to improve distance 
learning and tertiary education.  The Government has 
also embarked on a "Youth Corps" program to provide 
job related training to the unemployed. 
 
Migrant Workers Abroad 
 
¶102. There are an estimated 970,000 Sri Lankan 
workers abroad.  The majority of Sri Lankan workers 
abroad is unskilled (housemaids and laborers) and is 
located primarily in the Middle East.  Sri Lanka is 
also losing many of its technically and 
professionally qualified workers to more lucrative 
jobs abroad. 
 
Labor Regulations, Cost of Labor 
 
¶103.  Labor is available at a relatively low cost, 
though it is priced higher than in other South Asian 
countries.  Child labor is prohibited and is 
virtually nonexistent in the organized sector though 
child labor occurs in informal sectors.  The minimum 
legal age for employment is set at 14.  Most 
permanent full-time workers are covered by laws 
pertaining to maximum hours of work, minimum wage, 
leave, the right of association, and safety and 
health standards.  The Termination of Employment Act 
(TEA) makes it difficult to fire or lay off workers 
who have been employed more than six months for any 
reason other than serious, well-documented 
disciplinary problems.  Disputes over dismissals can 
be brought to a labor tribunal administered by the 
Ministry of Justice.  The labor tribunals have large 
backlogs of unresolved cases.  Certain labor disputes 
founded upon fundamental rights (allegations of 
termination/transfers based upon discrimination, 
etc.) can be brought directly to the Supreme Court. 
TEA prevented many companies from laying off 
permanent staff in 2001 despite economic contraction 
and export slowdown.  Consequently, affected 
companies had to bear the cost of maintaining excess 
labor. 
 
¶104. There is widespread belief that the labor laws 
and a plethora of holidays are dampening 
productivity.  The full moon day of each month, if it 
falls on a weekday, is a paid holiday.  There are 
also eight other public holidays.  The public sector 
and banks enjoy additional holidays.  The statutory 
holidays are in addition to 21 days annual/casual 
leave and approximately 21 days sick leave (number of 
days for sick leave is at the discretion of the 
management).  In addition, female employees are 
entitled to 84 days fully paid maternity leave for 
the first two confinements. 
 
Labor reforms 
 
¶105.  The current Government has embarked on a 
program to carry out needed labor reforms covering 
legal reforms, training and employment and increasing 
productivity of the labor force.  In January 2003, 
the Parliament passed amendments to the TEA and the 
Industrial Disputes Act (IDA) to improve labor 
mobility.  The amendments to TEA seek to facilitate 
easier termination, and provided for a standard 
compensation formula and an unemployment benefit 
scheme.  Amendments to the IDA included time-bound 
labor dispute resolution rules to expedite labor 
dispute resolution.  These laws will come into effect 
only after a new compensation formula and a new 
unemployment insurance scheme are established.  The 
current social safety net for the unemployed is 
inadequate and compensation is subject to 
discretionary rulings by the Labor Commissioner.  In 
the interim, the Labor Department uses the following 
non-binding minimum compensation formula as a 
guideline:  2 to 3 months salary for each year of 
service or full salary for remaining period of 
service up to retirement, whichever is less, subject 
to a maximum of 50 months salary. Some trade unions 
have shown reluctance to accept this formula and some 
companies have offered better packages.  The 
Government also relaxed restrictions on overtime work 
by women, permitting them to 60 hours of overtime 
work per month instead of 100 hours per year.   Other 
planned reforms include amendments to the Shop and 
Office Act to allow shop and office employees to work 
on shift basis and an amendment to the wages board 
ordinance, to encourage outsourcing and 
subcontracting.  These amendments are expected to 
especially facilitate call center-type operations.  A 
more systematic overhaul of the TEA and IDA would 
help to bring labor laws in line with international 
norms. 
 
¶106.  In addition to labor reforms, the Government 
has also prepared policy documents on labor.  A joint 
public and private sector committee has prepared a 
draft national employment policy.  The policy 
contains seven initiatives to facilitate employment 
creation through economic growth and improve 
employability of the current work force.  Among other 
measures, it recommends labor law reforms to 
facilitate private investment and improvements to 
tripartite dialogue between the state, private sector 
and employees to deal with industrial relations 
issues.  The Government has also developed a national 
productivity policy with the assistance of USAID.  It 
is aimed at developing long-term strategies to 
enhance productivity in all sectors of the economy. 
 
Trade Unions 
 
¶107. About 15 percent of labor in the industry and 
service sector is unionized.  Labor in free trade 
zone enterprises tends to be represented by non-union 
worker councils. 
 
¶108.  In 1999, the Government introduced regulations 
that prohibit unfair labor practices by employers. 
The law now requires employers to recognize trade 
unions and the right to collective bargaining, in 
line with ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association 
and 98 on the right to organize and bargain 
collectively.  The law compels employers to enter 
into negotiations with a trade union where the 
membership is at least 40 percent of the total 
workforce.  Some employers have been reluctant to 
accept this legislation as they claim it is one-sided 
and does not contain reciprocal guarantees from trade 
unions for responsible conduct. 
¶109.  Unions have complained that the government and 
some employers, especially in the BOI-run export 
processing zones, prohibit union access and do not 
register unions on a timely basis.  Employers allege 
that the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP), a Marxist 
political party that is against private ownership, is 
provoking labor to strike in the guise of trade union 
activity.  Due to its violent past, employers are 
generally not in favor of the JVP and its trade union 
arm, the Inter-Company Trade Union.  Prior to the 
December 2001 parliamentary elections, Inter-Company 
Trade Union became popular among workers.  It also 
staged strikes and protests in a few companies during 
¶2002.  Although the JVP continues to agitate against 
economic reforms and the peace process, its trade 
union activities are limited to normal union actions. 
 
¶110.  In 2002, the American Federation of Labor and 
Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) 
submitted a petition to the United States Trade 
Representative seeking suspension of GSP benefits for 
Sri Lanka due to labor right violations in some 
factories in the export processing zones.  This 
petition was not acted upon.  A similar submission 
was made to the EU by a local trade union when Sri 
Lanka applied for benefits under the special 
incentive arrangements of the GSP.  After an audit, 
the EU is positively considering granting 
preferential access to Sri Lanka based on protection 
of core labor standards.  The audit did not find 
serious problems with regard to core labor standards. 
The BOI has issued a new "labor standards and 
employee relations manual", instructing BOI companies 
to recognize trade unions and the right to collective 
bargaining.  According to the manual, where both a 
recognized trade union with bargaining power and a 
non-union worker council exist in an enterprise, the 
trade union will represent the employees in 
collective bargaining. 
 
¶111.  In the plantation sector, union participation 
rates are as high as 75 percent, though unionization 
levels are reportedly on the decline.  Key public 
sector entities such as the Ceylon Electricity Board 
and Sri Lanka Ports Authority also have large unions, 
which stage protests, often to obtain pay hikes and 
sometimes to protest anticipated moves towards 
privatization or restructuring.  Most of the major 
trade unions are affiliated with political parties, 
creating a highly politicized labor environment.  In 
what is seen as a positive development, several trade 
unions with affiliations to main political parties 
have formed themselves into an organized group, the 
National Association for Trade Union Research and 
Education (NATURE), to promote education and training 
among trade unionists. 
 
Collective Bargaining 
 
¶112.  Collective bargaining is not yet popular. 
Currently, about 50 companies (including a number of 
foreign-owned firms) belonging to the Employers' 
Federation of Ceylon (EFC) have collective agreements 
and use them to conduct negotiations on their behalf. 
 
Labor-Management Relations 
¶113.  Labor-management relations in the past have 
e 
been by and large confrontational.  This is due to a 
failure to recognize the need for a social 
partnership for mutual benefit.  The attitude of 
employers towards workers has changed considerably in 
the last few years.  Employers are becoming more 
conscious of the need to look after their human 
resources, and more effort is taken to ensure that 
workers feel motivated and cared for.  Labor- 
management relations vary from organization to 
organization; managers who emphasize communication 
with workers and offer training opportunities 
generally experience fewer difficulties.  US 
investors in Sri Lanka (including US garment buyers) 
generally promote good labor management relations and 
labor conditions that exceed local standards.  A few 
large Sri Lankan firms have started Employee Share 
Option Schemes.  Work stoppages and strikes in the 
private sector have been on a decline in the past six 
months.   Civil servants other than officers in the 
police, armed forces, and prison service, also have a 
right to strike. 
 
ILO conventions 
 
¶114.  Sri Lanka is a member of the International 
Labor Organization (ILO) and has ratified 39 
international labor conventions.  The labor laws of 
Sri Lanka are laid out in almost 50 different 
statutes.  Sri Lanka has ratified all eight 
conventions included in 1998 ILO Declaration on 
Fundamental Principals and Rights at Work (ILO Core 
Labor Standards).  ILO Convention 138 on minimum age 
for admission to employment and Convention 182 on 
worst forms of child labor were ratified during 2000- 
¶2001.  Sri Lanka ratified ILO convention 105 on 
Forced Labor in 2003.  The ILO, EFC and the AFL-CIO- 
sponsored American Center for Labor Solidarity are 
working to improve awareness about core labor 
standards.  The ILO also promotes a Decent Work 
Agenda in Sri Lanka. 
 
Foreign Trade Zones 
------------------- 
 
¶115. Sri Lanka has 10 free trade zones, also called 
export-processing zones, administered by the BOI. 
The oldest, the Katunayake and Biyagama Zones, 
located north of Colombo near the Bandaranaike 
International Airport, are fully occupied.  The third 
zone is located at Koggala on the southern coast. 
Several new mini export-processing zones were opened 
in the provinces during the last few years.  There 
are nearly 200 foreign export processing enterprises 
operating in these zones.  There are also two 
industrial parks that have both export-oriented and 
non-export oriented factories.  They are located in 
Pallekelle, near Kandy in central Sri Lanka and in 
Seethawaka in Avissawela about 60 kilometers from 
Colombo. 
 
¶116.  In the past, industrialists preferred to locate 
their factories in close proximity to Colombo harbor 
or airport to reduce transport cost and save time. 
The excessive concentration of industries around 
Colombo has created problems such as scarcity of 
labor, inadequate infrastructure, environmental 
pollution, escalation of real estate prices and 
congestion in the city.  Now, the BOI actively 
encourages the establishment of export-oriented 
factories in the newly developed industrial zones. 
The BOI also finds it easier to provide 
infrastructure facilities and security, as well as to 
monitor enterprises, when they are located in the 
zones. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment 
------------------------- 
US Investments 
 
¶117.  Major US companies with investments in Sri 
Lanka include:  Energizer Battery, Mast Industries, 
Smart Shirts (a subsidiary of Kellwood Industries), 
Caltex, Sportif, Citibank, Caterpillar,  3M, Cargill, 
Coca Cola, Celetron, Inc (formerly Tandon), Paxar 
Corp, Pepsi Co, Warburg Pincus, Worldquest, Fitch 
IBCR, AES Corporation, American International Group 
(AIG) and American Premium Water.  In addition, IBM, 
Lanier, NCR, GTE, Motorola, Procter & Gamble, Liz 
Claiborne, May Department Stores, Federated 
Department Stores, Tommy Hilfiger, J.C. Penney, the 
Gap, Sun Microsystems, Microsoft, Bates Strategic 
Alliance, McCann-Erickson, Pricewaterhouse Coopers, 
Ernst and Young and KPMG all have branches, 
affiliated offices or local 
distributors/representatives.  Kentucky Fried 
Chicken, Pizza Hut, Federal Express, UPS, Domino's 
Pizza and McDonald's are represented in Sri Lanka 
through franchises.  Numerous other American brands 
and products are represented by local agents. 
 
¶118.  US investment in Sri Lanka is estimated to be 
in the range of $200 million.  Among the recent 
investors in the power sector are AES Corporation and 
Caterpillar.  AIG insurance entered Sri Lanka in 
¶1999.  Others are expanding, such as Celetron Inc 
(memory boards), Citibank, and Mast Inc (apparel and 
related products).  During the past few years, 
several US companies have formed joint ventures or 
other partnerships with Sri Lankan companies in the 
IT sector, mainly in software development. 
 
Non-US Investments 
 
¶119.  Major non-US investors include: Unilever, 
Nestle's, British American Tobacco Company, Mitsui, 
Pacific Dunlop/Ansell, Prima, FDK and S.P. Tao. 
Indian Oil Corporation came to Sri Lanka in 2003, 
investing in an abandoned oil tank farm and the 
petroleum retailing business of the Ceylon Petroleum 
Corporation.  Leading US and foreign investors which 
have acquired significant stakes in privatized 
companies include Caltex; Norsk Hydro of Norway; 
Kabool Spinning and Textile, Tongyang Nylon, and 
Hanjung Steel, all of Korea; Nippon Telephone and 
Telegraph, Mitsubishi Corporation and C. Itoh (A.K.A. 
Itochu) of Japan; Emirates Airlines of United Arab 
Emirates; Shell Oil of the UK; and P&O Netherlands. 
 
¶120.  Reliable statistics on foreign investment by 
country are not available.  Leading sources of 
foreign investments are South Korea, Japan, US, 
Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore, and the U.K.  FDI in 
2002 was $246 million. 
 
Investment Statistics 
 
¶121.  Estimated total foreign investment by sector 
(in $ millions) 
 
 
 
 
SectorCumulative Total 
End 2002 
Food & beverage91 
Textile/apparel, leather265 
Chemical, rubber, plastic115 
stic 115 
Non-met. Mineral products37 
Fabricated metal, machinery58 
Other manufactured products101 
Services1,056 
 
Total1,723 
 
Source: Board of Investment of Sri Lanka 
Note: Investment figures reported here consist of 
direct investment plus loan financing.  The data 
provided by the BOI are incomplete.  They do not 
include foreign investment that came through non-BOI 
sources prior to 1994.  Foreign investment in the 
banking and insurance sectors are also not included. 
Figures reported by the BOI have been converted at 
average exchange rates prevailing in 2001 and 2002. 
 
End text. 
 
ENTWISTLE 
ISTLE