This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001430 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/21/2013 
TAGS: EPET PGOV PINS ASEC PHUM NI
SUBJECT: WARRI CRISIS UPDATE 21AUG03 
 
REF: ABUJA 1411 AND PREVIOUS 
 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Counselor James Maxstadt for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Warri remained calm overnight August 20-21 and 
through the day August 21 with a large Nigerian Army force 
observed throughout the town, according to a Warri-based 
worker for U.S. NGO "IFESH."  Local press and Reuters 
reported THAT Delta State Governor James Ibori brokered a 
ceasefire during his August 20 meeting with Ijaw and Itsekiri 
elders and security service chiefs. 
 
 
¶3. (C) In a conversation with CRO August 21, Federated Niger 
Delta Ijaw Communities (FNDIC) leader Dan Ekpedibe noted, 
however, that neither his militant group nor the Itsekiri 
militants were represented at the Ibori-chaired meeting. 
Nevertheless, he claimed that FNDIC would honor the ceasefire 
"if the other side doesn't attack." 
 
 
¶4. (C) According to the IFESH worker, who had spoken with the 
president of the Itsekiri National Youth Council president 
late on August 20, the Itsekiri are insisting on the further 
condition that the Ijaw vacate all Itsekiri villages attacked 
and taken over in March 2003.  Post is unable to confirm 
this. 
 
 
MILITARY PLANS 
-------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C/NF) Recently former Defense Minister Gen. (rtd) 
Theophilus Danjuma reportedly described to an oil company 
official the military's plan to blockade the three main 
rivers in the Warri area -- Escravos, Benin, and Forcados -- 
in an attempt to interdict oil thieves and pirates.  After 
establishing the blockade, the plan calls for military and 
police units to systematically comb the inner creeks in Warri 
to disarm militants, aided by surveillance and human 
intelligence.  Danjuma admitted, however, that beyond these 
limited short-term efforts, the GON has no holistic strategy 
for improving security in the Warri area. 
 
 
¶6. (C/NF) Shell has made plans to provide Nigerian military 
with a substantial amount of non-lethal equipment -- largely 
for transporting troops and equipment -- to support the 
military deployment, according to a source in the industry. 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Governor Ibori, who oil company officials describe as 
an accomplice in the trade of stolen oil in Warri, may have 
hurriedly brokered the ceasefire in an attempt to preempt 
military action. 
ROBERTS