This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 005510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/05/2013 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM KNNP EAID KS CH KN EUN USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: EU TROIKA DEC 9-12 VISIT TO PYONGYANG 
 
REF: ROME 5184 
 
Classified By: USEU poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C)  Summary.  Senior EU officials will visit Pyongyang 
December 9-12 to convey EU support for the Six Party Talks; 
EU interest in improving ROK-DPRK relations in order to 
coordinate peninsular development; the need to respect human 
rights; and the need to begin a process of economic reforms. 
The visiting EU "Troika" will be led by Italian Asia Director 
General Guido Martini (other EU participants listed para 5). 
Pyongyang's draft schedule for the EU centers on a "Political 
Dialogue" meeting with not-yet-named officials.  The EU 
Troika will also meet with FM Pak Man Sun, Vice FM Kung Sok 
Yung, General Ri Chan Bok, among others.  The Troika will 
round out its trip with visits to an information technology 
project and a pharmaceutical joint venture, and will hold 
consultations with aid organizations.  They will wrap ut the 
trip with consultations in Seoul, and would be open to 
debriefing US Embassy officials (see para 4).  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
EU to Focus on Six Party Talks, Economic Reform, 
Peninsula Development, Human Rights 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (C) Poloff discussed the EU visit to Pyongyang with 
Council Secretariat trip participant Bruno Hanses December 
4-5.  According to Hanses, the EU wants to deliver four 
strong messages to the North Koreans: 
 
-- On the DPRK's nuclear weapons program, the EU will say 
that it shares fully the concerns of the U.S. and 
International Community, and that it supports the Six Party 
talks aimed at reversing North Korean nuclear ambitions.  The 
EU is keen for Pyongyang to understand that European concerns 
about the situation are serious and indigenous, and not just 
a reflection of U.S. concerns.  The EU will be willing to 
engage with Pyongyang at a more substantive level only when 
the current situation is resolved.  Hanses said the EU wants 
to lend its full support to the Six Party talks, while at the 
same time "absolutely avoiding any impression of having a 
mediating role."  The visiting Troika intends to press firmly 
for DPRK cooperation in the Six Party context, but will not 
offer any mediating or facilitating services. 
 
-- On economic reform, the EU will continue its push for 
Pyongyang to take meaningful steps to reform its economy and 
liberalize its markets.  The EU will encourage the DPRK to 
speed up its reform efforts by cooperating with the ROK on 
liberalizing projects and policies.  Hanses reported that the 
EU is also considering the idea of offering technical 
assistance on economic reform to Pyongyang, if and when the 
nuclear situation is resolved.  Hanses described it as a 
preliminary idea for EU assistance in the future, pending 
positive developments on the ground.  He said the EU will 
not/not broach the subject with the North Koreans during the 
December 9-12 visit. 
 
-- The EU wants to add human rights to the agenda of the 
December 9-12 talks, but Hanses reports that Pyongyang has 
not responded to the request.  If human rights make the 
agenda, the EU will push for North Korea to sign up to 
international human rights conventions and begin 
demonstrating greater respect for human rights in general. 
The Troika will also press Pyongyang on allowing UN Human 
Rights Rapporteurs to have access to the country. 
 
-- The EU will press for greater DPRK-ROK coordination on 
"development of the peninsula," to include such things as 
economic liberalization, humanitarian activities, and 
infrastructure development. 
 
-------------- 
Draft Schedule 
-------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The EU Troika will hold pre-visit consultations in 
Beijing Monday December 8 before proceeding to Pyongyang 
December 9.  Pyongyang has proposed the following schedule to 
the EU: 
 
December 10 
-- Meeting with Protocol Vice FM Kung Sok Yung 
-- Political Dialogue session; DPRK officials unnamed 
-- Director Kim Chun Guk 
-- Visit to Piintec information technology project 
-- Meeting with the Vice President of the Presidaeum of the 
Supreme People's Assembly 
-- Meeting with General Ri Chan Bok 
-- Meeting with Song Kilnan 
-- Dialogue and reception with aid and humanitarian 
organizations 
 
December 11 
-- Briefing on the Pyongjsu pharmaceutical project 
-- Trip to Anju and Pukchang 
-- Meeting with FM Pak Man Sun 
-- Reception with DPRK officials 
 
December 12 
-- Drive to Seoul for consultations (the EU troika was given 
permission to drive across the DMZ). 
 
----------------------------- 
Debriefing for U.S. in Seoul? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) When asked about the possibility of a post-trip 
debriefing for USG officials in Seoul, Hanses said that it 
sounded like a good idea and asked that we have Embassy Seoul 
coordinate with the Italian Embassy to see if it could be 
arranged.  USEU believes this would be a valuable opportunity 
to get a first-hand account of the talks from EU participants 
while it is still fresh in their minds, and before they 
return to their offices in Rome, Dublin and Brussels.  If 
desired, Embassy Seoul should contact the Italian Embassy in 
Seoul to arrange a meeting with the Troika on December 12. 
 
---------------------- 
EU Troika Participants 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. The Italian EU Presidency will be represented on the visit 
by Asia Director General Guido Martini.  The upcoming Irish 
Presidency will be represented by Asia Director Cleona 
Mannehan.  Deputy Director General Anastassios Vikas and Desk 
Officer Bruno Hanses will attend for the Council Secretariat. 
 East Asia Director Percy Westerlund and Desk Officer Maria 
Castilo will represent the Commission. 
 
Foster