This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000508 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (FOR JWALLER); SA/PD (LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, 
WREINCKENS); SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  IRAQ 
 
REF:  (a) COLOMBO 502, (B) COLOMBO 480 
 
¶1. As reported in reftel (b), Colombo's weekenders (3/22- 
23) widely criticized what is usually described as an 
"American war" in Iraq.  At mid-week, however, interest is 
subdued. 
 
¶2. True, the war dominates Wednesday's (3/26) front-page, 
above the fold headlines.  "Six Iraqi war tanks destroyed" 
says a Sinhala daily; two English headlines read "Baghdad 
battle looms" and "Coalition forces close in on Baghdad." 
The vernacular newspapers stress the danger of chemical 
weapons:  "Coalition forces near Baghdad ... ready for a 
chemical war" says a Sinhala daily; "Saddam warns that 
chemical weapons will be used" and "Warning of chemical 
weapons if coalition forces reach Baghdad" appear in the 
Tamil dailies. 
 
¶3. Front-page headlines notwithstanding, however, on 3/26 
only one of Sri Lanka's dozen dailies published an 
editorial regarding the war in Iraq.  For excerpts, see 
para. 5 below. 
 
¶4. Comment.  As alluded to in reftel (A), in recent 
conversation with our PAO, the editor of a major English 
daily said that, in Sri Lanka, editorial and op-ed 
treatment of the war is little more than chattering classes 
talking to each other.  Ordinary Sri Lankans are focused on 
peace at home, not war in Iraq.  The Sinhalese majority, he 
said, are more leery of the Tamil minority than of Saddam. 
... or Bush.  And the Tamil minority's apprehensions, in 
turn, are focused more on the Sinhalese majority and the 
Island's Muslim sub-minority than on events beyond these 
shores.  Pocketbook issues may arouse Sri Lankan interest 
in the war, however.  As we have reported on other 
occasions, Sri Lankans -- and not just the chattering 
classes -- wonder openly if the war will threaten 
remittances from Sri Lankan workers or increase the price 
of oil or depress the market for Sri Lankan tea.  As/when 
the war begins to "pinch the Sri Lankan purse," the editor 
said, Sri Lankan opinion may grow ugly.  End comment. 
 
¶5. Excerpts from an editorial, "Save the civilians," which 
appeared in the ISLAND (opposition English daily, 
islandwide circulation) on 3/26: 
 
"... despite the atrocities committed by President Saddam 
Hussein on his people, Arab nationalism and the bonds of 
the Islamic brotherhood are keeping not only the Iraqis 
together but have resulted in emphatic expressions of 
solidarity in other Islamic countries as well. 
 
"People ... don't like armies of occupation.  If it comes 
to a choice between their own tyrant and a foreign army, 
they would prefer their own abomination.  A long time 
military occupation of Iraq is bound to create severe 
problems for the Americans and the British. 
 
"The Iraqis, however, will suffer most.  The many horrors 
of war have already visited the areas of occupation. There 
are ringing calls made around the world for provision of 
assistance to the Iraqi civilians and UN Secretary General 
Koffi Annan yesterday reminded the that the `belligerents' 
are obliged to provide relief measures under international 
law. 
 
"The people of Iraq have suffered much under their own 
dictator and they should not be made to undergo further 
agony and torture in war." 
 
Wills