This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 KATHMANDU 000365 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, SA/RA AND SA/INS 
STATE ALSO PLEASE PASS USAID 
LONDON FOR POL/REIDEL 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: THIRD ANNUAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
(TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 22225 
 
¶1. (U) Following is Post's submission for the third annual 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report.  Embassy point of 
contact for the report is Political/Economic Officer Sarah 
Welborne (tel: 977-1-411-179, fax: 977-1-410-723, e-mail: 
welbornese@state.gov). 
 
¶2. (SBU) OVERVIEW 
 
-- A. Nepal is a country of origin for international 
trafficking of women and children.  Some trafficking also 
occurs within the country.  The majority of those trafficked 
are poor, undereducated young women, though trafficking in 
boys also has been reported.  Girls as young as nine years 
old have been trafficked. 
 
The magnitude of the problem remains difficult to measure, 
as reliable data are not available.  The most widely quoted 
NGO statistics state that 5,000 to 7,000 girls are 
trafficked to India for prostitution each year, but these 
figures are extrapolated, based on a number of assumptions, 
and do not take into account any victims who are trafficked 
for purposes other than prostitution. The GON does not keep 
official statistics on the number of victims trafficked. 
 
An ILO-IPEC Rapid Assessment Survey (2002) on Trafficking in 
Girls with Special Emphasis on Prostitution estimated that 
12,000 girls are trafficked every year.  The study targeted 
populations including "at-risk" girls, girls who had been 
trafficked within Nepal, and those who had returned from 
India.  Though trafficking is prevalent in many castes and 
ethnic groups, the ILO assessment concluded that those most 
at risk are members of lower castes and ethnic groups 
traditionally resident in Nepal's hilly regions. 
 
Discrimination based on caste and ethnicity, though illegal 
in Nepal, is imbedded in economic and social structures. 
Gender-based discrimination is widespread, deeply rooted in 
tradition and sometimes supported by law.  Women and girls 
from lower castes or "hill" ethnic groups therefore can be 
subject to double or triple marginalization, increasing 
their vulnerability to exploitative practices such as 
trafficking. 
 
Additionally, an ongoing Maoist insurgency has disrupted 
government control in some of the country's remote areas. 
Economic insecurity, political instability and physical 
danger as a result of the armed conflict have displaced 
thousands of women and children from the poorest sectors of 
society.  Threats of abduction by the Maoists have compelled 
large numbers of children to leave their homes to avoid 
forced conscription.  Death of one or both parents has 
lowered an already poor standard of living for many 
children, forcing them to work outside the home or fend for 
themselves on the street.  NGOs report that trafficking is 
on the rise in these vulnerable populations. 
 
-- B. The Ministry of Women, Children and Social Welfare 
(MWCSW) has identified 26 high-priority districts for anti- 
trafficking interventions, most of which are in Nepal's 
hilly, undeveloped regions.  Most trafficking victims 
originate in these high-priority districts.  Women and 
children who have migrated to Kathmandu and other urban 
areas to find work also reportedly have been trafficked. 
 
Nepali trafficking victims are most often taken overland to 
India for work in that country's sex industry and for bonded 
labor.  Some victims are also trafficked to Hong Kong, Saudi 
Arabia and other countries in the Middle East. 
 
-- C. No significant changes in the direction or extent of 
trafficking have been reported in the last year. 
 
-- D.  Nepal's Institute for Integrated Development Studies 
(IIDS) conducted a study entitled "Status and Dimension of 
Trafficking Within Nepal" with UNIFEM support under the 
South Asian Regional Initiative for Gender Equity 
(SARI/Equity) program in 2002.  Supported by The Asia 
Foundation, the Center for Legal Research and Resource 
Development (CeLLRD) completed a baseline survey in five 
districts. 
 
Also in 2002, ILO/IPEC published reports on Trafficking in 
Girls with Special Reference to Prostitution, Trafficking 
and Sexual Abuse Among Street Children in Kathmandu, Cross 
Border Trafficking of Boys and Internal Trafficking Among 
Children Engaged in Prostitution. 
 
-- E. Not applicable.  Nepal is not a destination country 
for trafficking in persons. 
 
-- F. Government officials, police and NGOs suspect that 
organized criminal groups and "marriage brokers" are the 
main traffickers in Nepal.  Though most are Nepali, they 
have links with brothels in Mumbai and other cities in 
India.  The traffickers typically target high-vulnerability 
groups like those listed in para A.  NGOs have found that 
once prevention programs are instituted in a district, 
traffickers move on to other locations. 
 
In general, the main factors contributing to trafficking in 
women and girls from Nepal are poverty, lack of alternative 
employment opportunities in the countryside, illiteracy, 
ignorance about the dangers of prostitution, family 
disharmony, domestic violence and gender discrimination. 
Contributing factors to the smaller phenomenon of 
trafficking of boys for exploitative labor include poverty 
and lack of alternative employment opportunities, as well as 
a traditional pattern of male migration for employment. 
 
NGOs estimate that approximately half of victims are lured 
to India with the promise of a good marriage and/or job, but 
many others are sold by family members.  A small number are 
kidnapped.  No firm numbers are available. 
 
Nepal and India have an open border.  Traffickers typically 
move their victims overland on secondary roads or via public 
transportation. 
 
-- G. Political will to combat trafficking exists at the 
highest levels of government, and the GON is making a good- 
faith effort to seriously address the problem.  The MWCSW 
has instituted a National Task Force Against Trafficking to 
coordinate government response, and is working with the ILO, 
UNDP and other international organizations to increase GON 
capacity to prevent trafficking and prosecute offenders. 
Directly and through district-level task forces, the 
Ministry coordinates with NGOs to rehabilitate and assist 
victims.  There are programs in place to train police forces 
and the judiciary to deal effectively with trafficking 
cases. 
 
The MWCSW has drafted strengthened anti-trafficking 
legislation to assist in the prosecution of offenders.  The 
legislation has not yet passed. 
 
The current Assistant Minister for Women, Children and 
Social Welfare, Ms. Anuradha Koirala, is an internationally 
recognized anti-trafficking activist and head of a well- 
known NGO in the field, Maiti Nepal.  One of the highest- 
ranking police officers in the country, Dr. Govinda Prasad 
Thapa, has been vocal in support and active in development 
of national and regional anti-trafficking initiatives. 
 
-- H.  There is no documented evidence that government 
authorities or individual members of government facilitate 
trafficking, condone trafficking or are otherwise complicit 
in such activities.  However, government authorities such as 
immigration officials, police and judges do engage in graft 
and corruption, and these practices no doubt play a role in 
some trafficking cases.  There have been no reported 
instances of prosecution or conviction of government 
officials on trafficking-related charges. 
 
-- I.  One of the poorest countries in the world, Nepal 
lacks the resources to address many of the underlying causes 
of trafficking.  Under-funded government welfare agencies 
are generally incapable of delivering effective outreach 
programs or assistance to trafficking victims.  As a result, 
anti-trafficking efforts have been primarily the domain of 
NGOs and bilateral donors. 
 
Institutional capacity to address the trafficking problem is 
weak.  In particular, the police lack both training and 
resources, and the courts are overburdened and susceptible 
to corruption. 
 
Political instability has also hampered GON anti-trafficking 
efforts.  Several governments have come and gone in rapid 
succession, and since the dissolution of the last parliament 
in May 2002, no elections have been held.  As a result, 
draft legislation to increase penalties for trafficking- 
related offenses has yet to be passed, and the "National 
Plan of Action" to combat trafficking has yet to be 
implemented completely. 
 
¶3. (SBU) PREVENTION 
 
-- A.  The Government of Nepal has acknowledged publicly 
that trafficking is a problem.  Prime Ministers, political 
party leaders, parliamentarians and ministry officials have 
stated publicly that trafficking is a national problem. 
Former Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba affirmed during his 
tenure that "the government has taken trafficking as a 
serious problem," and "a serious crime."  Pledging to seek 
stronger laws to prosecute traffickers, Deuba also said the 
government must address the underlying causes. 
 
-- B.  The MWCSW has primary responsibility for the 
development and coordination of the GON's anti-trafficking 
efforts.  In addition, the MWCSW has instituted a National 
Task Force Against Trafficking that includes personnel from 
the National Planning Commission, the Nepal Police and the 
Ministries of Labor and Transportation Management; Home; 
Foreign Affairs; Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs; 
Education and Sports; and Health.  The ILO, UNICEF and two 
representative NGOs are also members. 
 
Additionally, the Nepal Police have established local-level 
Women and Children Service Centers as part of their 
community policing efforts.  The Centers operate with a 
combined mandate of law enforcement, counseling and public 
awareness. 
 
-- C.  The MWCSW, NGOs and UNIFEM have all implemented 
local, regional and national information campaigns about 
trafficking in persons.  The GON has prepared radio 
programs, audio-visual presentations, booklets, pamphlets 
and signboards aimed at preventing trafficking among 
vulnerable groups.  "Village Vigilance Committees" (VVCs) 
have been established as pilot projects in some districts, 
training local residents to recognize possible trafficking 
cases and rescue potential victims before they can be moved 
across the border.  Though no statistics are available, the 
GON reports that the VVCs have been successful in stopping a 
number of attempts to traffic girls to India. 
-- D.  Under a new GON initiative, announced in January 
2003, all workers traveling overseas will be required to 
attend an orientation session explaining worker rights, 
safety issues and relevant regulations.  A labor office will 
be established at the airport to reinforce the message.  The 
12-point program also abolished a five-year-old rule 
prohibiting Nepali women from working in Gulf countries. 
The ban was imposed in 1998 after reports of hardship and 
abuse from returning women workers.  Women's activists had 
voiced concerns that while the law did not prevent Nepali 
women from clandestinely departing from India for work in 
the Gulf, it restricted women's access to information about 
their destinations and prevented them from attending 
orientation classes, putting them at risk of exploitation. 
 
The MWCSW publishes a newsletter addressing issues of 
concern to women and children, and operates a program in 47 
districts to emphasize to parents the importance of sending 
their children to school.  Encouraging children to stay in 
school is also a large component of the government's 
campaign to eliminate child labor, currently being carried 
out under the auspices of a USDOL-funded Timebound Project. 
 
Government-initiated income-generation projects have been 
introduced in more than 3900 villages, providing micro- 
credit loans, administering savings programs and encouraging 
banks to support women entrepreneurs in almost all districts 
of the country. 
 
--E.  The GON is unable to support financially most 
prevention programs, but is very receptive to private 
efforts.  The government makes its personnel readily 
available to take part in anti-trafficking training 
programs, provides government facilities for outreach 
programs and training, and otherwise supports private 
initiatives to the best of its ability.  The Ministry, with 
technical assistance from the Center for Population and 
Development Activities (CEDPA) and funding from USAID/W, has 
prepared a national Informal Education and Communication 
(IEC) strategy.  The MWCSW provides additional funding in 
priority districts. 
 
-- F.  The MWCSW fosters a collaborative relationship with 
donors and NGOs in joint pursuit of anti-trafficking goals. 
For example, "Beyond Trafficking -- A Joint Initiative in 
the Millennium Against Trafficking of Girls and Women (JIT)" 
is a collaborative effort of the MWCSW, UN System Task Force 
Against Trafficking and other donors.  In addition to 
cooperative work on the JIT and IEC, the Ministry has also 
worked collaboratively with CEDPA and the ILO to establish a 
Documentation and Information Center on trafficking and 
developed software to manage information.  An Office of the 
National Rapporteur has been set up with input from UNDP. 
 
-- G.  Nepal's open land border with India does not allow 
for stringent monitoring.  One NGO has had some success at 
monitoring the border independently, and UNICEF has provided 
training for police and immigration officials to help them 
identify potential trafficking victims at border crossings. 
 
-- H.  See para B for information about GON anti-trafficking 
task force.  The Commission for the Investigation of the 
Abuse of Authority investigates public corruption. 
-- I.  At a South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
(SAARC) Summit held in January, 2002, Nepal, together with 
India and other South Asian countries, signed the SAARC 
Convention on Preventing and Combating the Trafficking in 
Women and Children for Prostitution.  Together with other 
SAARC countries, Nepal has agreed to establish SAARCPOL, a 
regional body to fight trafficking and other transnational 
crimes.   Nepal and India have agreed to form a Joint Cross 
Border Committee Against Trafficking. 
 
Nepal is a party to the Convention on Elimination of All 
Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEADAW), the UN 
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the ILO Minimum Age 
Convention, the ILO Convention on the Prohibition and 
Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of 
Child Labor, the ILO Forced Labor Convention and the 
Convention on the Abolition of Slavery. 
 
-- J.  The GON's National Plan of Action to combat 
trafficking was developed in consultation with the ILO, NGOs 
and relevant government agencies.  It has not yet been fully 
implemented. 
 
-- K.  The MWCSW's National Task Force Against Trafficking 
is responsible for developing anti-trafficking programs 
within the GON. 
 
¶4. (SBU) INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
-- A.  No new anti-trafficking laws have been enacted, 
though draft legislation exists and is expected to be 
brought before a new session of Parliament, following as-yet 
unannounced national elections. 
 
The Human Trafficking Control Act of 1986 is the current 
anti-trafficking legislation.  It prohibits: 
 - Selling of a human being for any purpose; 
 - Taking any person to a foreign territory with an 
intention of selling that person to a third party; 
 - Involving any woman in prostitution by enticement, 
allurement, fraud, threat, coercion or any other means; 
 - Abetting, assisting, conspiring or attempting to carry 
out any of the above acts. 
 
The 1986 Act is flawed in several ways.  It does not 
criminalize the separation of a minor from his or her legal 
guardian with the intent of trafficking the minor, nor does 
it criminalize the receipt of a trafficked person.  Under 
the terms of the Act, no crime occurs until the victim and 
perpetrator are outside Nepali jurisdiction.  The Act makes 
no provision for the compensation or protection of 
trafficking victims.  Victims are often reluctant to 
testify, because trials are held in open court and there is 
no legal protection for witnesses.  Local police cannot 
investigate trafficking complaints without permission from 
prosecutors, and the resultant delay gives perpetrators time 
to flee. 
 
-- B.  The 1986 Act provides for jail terms of up to 20 
years for traffickers, but penalties are often much less. 
Approximately 38% of traffickers receive minimum sentences 
when convicted. 
 
-- C.  Penalties for rape vary with the age of the victim. 
If the victim is under 16, jail sentences of up to ten years 
are possible.  For victims 16 and over, sentences can be up 
to five years.  In either case, the court may order a 
convicted rapist to give half of his property to the victim. 
NGOs state that victims are not detained, jailed or 
deported.  If the victim is a foreigner, he or she will be 
handed over to the concerned Embassy. 
 
-- D.  During FY 2002, 92 cases of trafficking were reported 
to the police.  2002 prosecution statistics are not yet 
available. (Post will provide them septel prior to March 
publication of TIP report.) 
 
-- E.  Government officials, police and NGOs suspect that 
organized criminal groups and "marriage brokers" are the 
primary perpetrators of trafficking in Nepal.  They note 
that parents and other relatives of trafficking victims are 
often complicit as well. 
 
-- F.  By its own admission, the government lacks the 
trained manpower necessary to investigate effectively cases 
of trafficking.  While no legal restrictions prevent the 
police from conducting covert operations or electronic 
surveillance, poor training, rudimentary equipment and 
procedural inertia prevent the techniques from being 
utilized. 
 
-- G.  As part of an anti-trafficking initiative begun in 
1996, the Nepal Police have occasionally trained a limited 
number of personnel in the investigation of trafficking. 
However, most training programs of this type are developed 
and administered by NGOs.  The GON supports programs to the 
best of its ability by providing facilities and making its 
personnel available to attend. 
 
-- H.  In October, 2000, Nepal's Home Ministry, the UN 
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and NGOs hosted a 
regional workshop for senior police officers to enhance 
cross-border anti-trafficking collaboration.  Several follow- 
up meetings involving Nepal and India have taken place. 
 
-- I.  Nepal and India, are currently discussing their 
bilateral extradition treaty, signed in 1955.  The treaty is 
being updated to address transnational crimes more 
effectively.  Nepali law does not prohibit the government 
from extraditing its own nationals, but the GON has not had 
occasion to do so in connection with trafficking. 
 
-- J.  Post has no evidence that, as a matter of policy, GON 
authorities facilitate, condone or are otherwise complicit 
in human trafficking.  However, local anti-trafficking NGOs 
report that individual local officials and border police 
sometimes accept bribes in exchange for allowing the 
traffickers and their victims to cross Nepal's border with 
India.  The Commission for the Investigation of the Abuse of 
Authority (CIAA) has the power to investigate incidences of 
corruption by public officials. 
 
-- K.  No GON officials have been prosecuted for involvement 
in trafficking or trafficking-related corruption. 
 
-- L.  Nepal ratified ILO Convention 29 on Forced Labor on 
January 3, 2002, and ratified ILO Convention 182 on 
September 13, 2001.  Nepal has not yet ratified ILO 
Convention 105. 
 
Nepal has not ratified the Sale of Children Protocol, which 
supplements the Rights of the Child Convention; or the 
Protocol to Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children, which supplements the UN 
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. 
 
¶5. (SBU) PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
 
-- A.  Questions regarding residency status and relief from 
deportation do not appear to apply to Nepal, as Nepal is not 
a destination country for international trafficking in 
persons.  For victims of internal trafficking, victim care 
facilities are limited, and are run primarily by NGOs. 
 
-- B.  The GON provides limited funding to local NGOs to 
provide assistance to victims of trafficking with 
rehabilitation, medical care and legal services.  The GON 
does not fund foreign NGOs.  Bilateral and multilateral 
donors, working with the GON through the MWCSW, do fund 
local and foreign NGOs to provide victim assistance. 
 
-- C.  The government of Nepal does protect the rights of 
victims.  Trafficking victims are not detained, jailed, or 
deported, nor are they, as trafficking victims, prosecuted 
for violations of other laws. 
 
-- D.  While the GON has not actively encouraged trafficking 
victims to file civil suits or seek legal action against 
traffickers, once the victim does file a civil suit or make 
a criminal complaint, the GON will prosecute the case at no 
cost to the victim.  The Nepal Police have initiated a 
"Women's Cell," aimed at assisting victims of trafficking 
and domestic violence. 
 
-- E.  There is no provision for the government to provide 
protection to victims or witnesses. 
 
-- F.  As part of the new foreign employment initiative 
announced in January 2003 (see Prevention, para D), the GON 
intends to open an Embassy in Kuala Lumpur and to appoint 
labor attaches to Malaysia and UAE, both of which have large 
concentrations of Nepali workers.  The government has also 
initiated a request for Saudi Arabia and Malaysia to open 
consular sections in Kathmandu.  A welfare fund will be 
established to assist workers injured on overseas jobs. 
 
Government representatives at Consulates in India, the 
destination country for most of Nepal's trafficking victims, 
do not receive special training in protection.  However, 
they assist with the repatriation of victims to Nepal if 
cases are brought to their attention. 
 
-- G.  In May 1999, the MWCSW opened the Women's Skill 
Development Center, a rehabilitation and skills training 
center for women returned from being trafficked and for 
women at risk of being trafficked.  Most "safe houses" and 
rehabilitation centers are run by NGOs. 
 
-- H.  There are more then 40 national-level NGOs working on 
the issues of trafficking.  With the GON's endorsement, many 
NGOs conduct public information and outreach campaigns in 
rural areas.  They also provide prevention education, micro- 
finance, rehabilitation, advocacy and legal assistance.  Two 
representative NGOs are members of the MWCSW's National Task 
Force, and the GON works closely with NGOs to provide 
services to victims and assist in the implementation of the 
National Plan of Action. 
 
¶6. (U) OMB Reporting Requirements:  One FS-03 officer spent 
14 hours drafting and clearing this year's TIP report.  One 
FS-01 officer spent one hour, one FS-02 officer spent 15 
minutes, and DCM spent 30 minutes clearing the report.  One 
FSN-11 USAID employee spent five hours researching 
information. 
 
MALINOWSKI