This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LAGOS 002149 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR AF/PD, AF/W, ECA/A/E/AF 
POSTS FOR ABUJA, CPAO, CAO 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL NI
SUBJECT:  EXPLORING THE AFRO-HISPANIC CONNECTION IN 
NIGERIA 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  In a fitting tribute to National Hispanic 
Heritage Month (September 15 - October 15), the US 
Consulate, Lagos, hosted its first ever function to 
mark the occasion on October 14. END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2. The theme of the program, dubbed "Exploring the Afro- 
Hispanic Connection: A Celebration of National Hispanic 
Heritage Month, 2003," was hosted by CG Hinson-Jones, 
and included a program of music, art appreciation, food 
appreciation as well as the screening of an educational 
movie at the Consul General's residence. Program goals 
included addressing issues of diversity inclusion, an 
important theme as Nigeria struggles to establish a 
pluralist Democracy. 
 
 
¶3. Guests of honor, numbering over 200 in total, were 
represented by the international diplomatic community, 
the local and national Nigerian political 
establishment, Lagos-area business leaders, 
academicians, local artists, US citizens and mission 
employees. 
 
 
¶4. The keynote speaker for the event, the Honorable 
Michael Olayemi Cardoso, Commissioner for Economic 
Planning and Budget, Lagos State, highlighted the Lagos- 
Hispanic connection by citing the historical nexus 
between both in the Lagos-area.  Mr. Cardoso also 
announced the partnership between Lagos and the city of 
Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, an initiative that will 
provide an important building block for Nigerian 
outreach and business development in South America. 
 
 
¶5.  Key U.S.-Nigerian Mission Performance Plan 
objectives were addressed as part of the program, most 
notably focusing on ideas to improve economic ties 
between Nigeria and other countries. 
 
 
¶6. Recommendation:  The US Consulate, Lagos, encourages 
the promotion and adoption of more National Hispanic 
Heritage Month programming for 2004 in Sub-Saharan 
Africa.  Additionally, post will expand programming 
next year to include Mission Performance Plan 
objectives HIV/AIDS, corruption and democratization. 
 
 
JGREGOIRE, ACTING