This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 000276 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM PINR NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: FRIENDS OF NIGERIA MEETING ON ELECTION 
PREPARATIONS 
 
REF: A. A) ABUJA 49 
     ¶B. B) ABUJA 48 
     ¶C. C) ABUJA 16 
     ¶D. D) ABUJA 15 
 
 
 Classified by Ambassador Howard F. Jeter: Reason: 1.5(b) and 
(d) 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The Ambassador convened a meeting of the 
Friends of Nigeria January 14. The British High Commissioner, 
Canadian High Commissioner and German Ambassador attended. 
The discussion focused on the presidential conventions of the 
major political parties, the second round of voter 
registration, and international observers for the general 
elections.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
------------------- 
CONVENTION READ-OUT 
------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) The Chiefs of Mission provided their observations of 
the PDP and ANPP conventions held in early January. Reftels 
cover these details at length. Conclusions regarding the PDP 
convention were that President Obasanjo encountered a stiff 
challenge from former Vice President Ekweume and that the 
political stock of Vice President Atiku and the State 
Governors rose as a result of the convention but that 
President Obasanjo may likely backtrack from many of the 
promises made to Atiku and the Governors in the heat of the 
moment. (It is believed that Obasanjo promised to turn over 
control of most, if not the entire domestic agenda to Atiku). 
 A major issue regarding how the important South-South region 
will vote is whether Obasanjo will honor his vow to sign the 
oil dichotomy bill (ref B).  On the ANPP side, all agreed 
that former Head of State Mohammedu Buhari will have a 
difficult time beating Obasanjo due to Buhari's lack of 
support in the South.  With the ascendance of Buhari, the 
ANPP will be viewed as a northern party. Also discussants 
expressed concern that religion may play a  divisive role in 
the election. 
 
 
------------------ 
VOTER REGISTRATION 
------------------ 
 
 
¶3. (C) The general belief was that the January 21-24 second 
round of registration indicated a show of good faith by INEC 
to respond to the public criticism of the initial round of 
registration. Nevertheless, the second round will be little 
more than an event to boost public confidence and will not 
register many new voters. (Comment: This prediction of a low 
turn-out proved to be correct. End Comment.) 
 
 
---------- 
OBSERVERS 
---------- 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Participants discussed the GON Diplomatic Note 
outlining the accreditation process for international 
election observers.  Prospective monitors must submit 
biographic information; depending on the detail required by 
the GON, this requirement could be onerous.  Discussion also 
focused on the need to develop a deployment plan for the 
observers to maximize geographic coverage and to prevent too 
many observers from converging in too few areas of the 
country.  It was agreed to hold another meeting to begin 
developing the deployment plan. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Note: In view of the GON requirement that prospective 
international monitors submit CV,s, we urge those U.S. 
organizations planning to send election observers to submit 
the names and CV,s of the observers with utmost dispatch. 
 
 
JETER 
JETER