This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/INS, G/TIP, PRM, AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KCRM KWMN EAID SMIG ELAB KPAO CE
SUBJECT:  Sri Lanka:  Proposal for anti-trafficking in 
persons (TIP) project for FY 2003 
 
Ref:  STATE 241260 
 
¶1. (U) Per Reftel, Mission is providing the attached 
program proposal to strengthen the capabilities of the 
Sri Lankan National Child Protection Agency (NCPA) in 
enforcing the government's laws regulating trafficking 
of children in regards to prostitution and labor. 
 
¶2. (U) Attached is the project description based on the 
outline provided in para. 14 of Reftel. 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
---------- 
 
¶A. Title:  Program to enhance Civil and Police 
Coordination and Investigation Techniques in Preventing 
the Trafficking of Children 
 
¶B. Name of Organization:  National Child Protection 
Agency (NCPA), The Police Unit attached to the NCPA, and 
the Police Division on Women's and Children's Issues. 
 
¶C. Duration:  One year. 
 
¶D. Objective:  The program will enhance the coordination 
capabilities between the civilian investigators and 
policy advisors with the police officers investigating 
the crimes.  Particular focus should be on the 
coordination between the civilian and police offices 
within the NCPA.  A brief inprocessing/training program 
should be established to bring new personnel into an 
organization where the operations of the police and 
civilian personnel must be intricately connected to 
operate well.  In addition, a review should be conducted 
to see which resources would most help the NCPA in its 
mandate (reviewing items ranging from investigative 
hardware to software for internal computer systems). 
 
E-1. Justification:  Sri Lanka has a small but 
persistent problem of trafficking in children for 
purposes of labor and sexual exploitation.  Since June 
1999, the NCPA has been charged with bringing to the 
police's attention instances of trafficking and other 
abuses relating to children and to act in an advisory 
position to the apprise the GSL of additional 
legislation that is required.  The NCPA is in the 
forefront of the GSL's efforts to prevent trafficking of 
children in Sri Lanka.  In October 2002, the NCPA was 
strengthen by the addition of a 14 person police unit 
specifically tasked to assist the NCPA in its 
investigations of those involved in trafficking and 
other abuses against children.  With the ongoing peace 
process, police are transferring from front-line 
positions in Sri Lanka's fight against the Liberation 
Tigers of Tamil Eelam to more traditional police roles. 
This is not an easy transition.  This program will help 
form the foundation for the relationship between the 
civil and police authorities involved in combating 
trafficking in children.  The USG will thus be 
instrumental in insuring the development of a 
professional and responsive anti-trafficking in persons 
unit. 
 
E-2.  This program further develops the assistance that 
the USG has already provided to the NCPA and lays the 
foundation for future cooperation.  The USG has supplied 
the NCPA with equipment in the past and has seen the 
equipment used effectively in arresting those abusing 
children. 
 
¶F. Performance Measures:  The NCPA has been involved in 
investigations leading to the arrest for trafficking in 
children, particularly in regards to sexual 
exploitation, but the arrests are few and far between. 
Performance Measures will include increased arrests and 
successful prosecutions, and more hopefully a measurable 
decline in the amount of children trafficked.  Mission 
will review these issues through regular contact with 
the NCPA, the police, and (I)NGOs focusing on the issue. 
 
¶G. Budget breakout: 
Assessment phase:  USD 20,000 
Equipment purchase:  USD 30-50,000 (based on assessment) 
Establishing inprocessing/training program:  USD 100,000 
 
¶H. Host government contribution:  The NCPA and the 
attached police unit is funded by the GSL. 
 
¶I. Other donor contribution:  Other donors have 
contributed and continue to contribute to the work of 
the NCPA.  The USG has provided equipment in the past. 
This program will be outside of the current scope of 
assistance being given to the NCPA. 
 
¶J. Funding Mechanism:  Funding for the program will be 
directly between the USG and GSL. 
 
¶K. Point Of Contact:  Jason Wemhoener-Cuite, Political 
Officer,  phone:  940-1-448-007 x2425. 
 
WILLS