This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 001308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, APRIL 7: WAR IN IRAQ 
 
SUMMARY: SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, APRIL 7: WAR IN 
IRAQ 
 
SUMMARY: Despite the anger at Arab media portrayals of the 
war, on commentator writes that the televised image of 
American soldiers retreating from Al-Najaf when faced with a 
mob believing erroneously that the troops were heading to 
occupy the mosque is a positive example of US respect for 
Muslims, and an expression of "democracy" by the Iraqi 
people. Another accuses the US of conducting a "scorched 
earth policy" in the campaign in Iraq by deliberately 
targeting Iraq's infrastructure. 
 
Reportage on the war has a pronounced pro-coalition tone. 
Photos of smiling Iraqis greetings coalition forces and of a 
US soldier holding an Iraqi child appear in a number of 
dailies. Banner headlines announce the entry of US troops 
into Baghdad, proclaiming, "Liberation Comes Calling" and 
"End of the Age of the Palace... Beginning of A New Era." 
 
One commentator believes that Arab anger at the US is 
justified, but that demonstrating in support of Iraq is 
against the interests of the Iraqi people and "only serves 
the current Iraqi regime and the coming American military 
presence." In an op/ed entitled "Whom To Believe?" a writer 
points out the differing opinions on the role of the UN in 
post-war Iraq expressed in recent British and US statements. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶1.   Despite the anger at Arab media portrayals of the war, 
one commentator writes that the televised image of American 
soldiers retreating from Al-Najaf when faced with a mob that 
mistakenly believed the troops were heading to occupy the 
mosque is a positive example of US respect for Muslims. 
Another accuses the US of conducting a "scorched earth 
policy" in the campaign in Iraq by deliberately targeting 
Iraq's infrastructure. 
 
One commentator believes that Arab anger at the US is 
justified, but that demonstrating in support of Iraq is 
against the interests of the Iraqi people and "only serves 
the current Iraqi regime and the coming American military 
presence." 
 
In an op/ed entitled "Who To Believe?" a writer points out 
the differing opinions on the role of the UN in post-war 
Iraq expressed in recent British and US statements. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News Stories: A senior American official told Al-Rai Al- 
Aam that American interrogators ask all Iraqi POWs about the 
whereabouts of Kuwaiti POWs. 
 
All newspapers report on April 7 that the Criminal Court has 
begun deliberation on the case of Sami Al-Mutairi, the man 
who confessed to killing an American civilian contractor in 
an ambush on January 21. 
 
Kuwait has sent 32 trucks to Al-Najaf loaded with 18,000 
cartons of water, 121,000 meals, 10,000 blankets and 
medicine supplies as part of Kuwaiti humanitarian assistance 
to the Iraqi people, all newspapers report. 
 
Al-Watan reports that a number of Kuwaiti families prepared 
packages filled with chocolate, sweets and non-food supplies 
to be presented to American soldiers in Iraq. 
 
Al-Qabas reports that Kuwait invited GCC foreign ministers 
for an emergency meeting in Kuwait on April 7 to discuss 
developments in the region. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on April 6 that the Kuwait stock exchange 
has reached record levels for the second time this week. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports on its front page on April 6 the 
denial by Sheikh Nasser Mohammed Al-Ahmad of rumors of the 
death of the Amir. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "The People of Al-Najaf Defeated America" 
Abdelatif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas (4/5): 
"The image of American soldiers retreating from Al-Najaf 
must remain in the Arab and Muslim memory. The people of Al- 
Najaf practiced their right of rejection that led the 
American forces to retreat in respect of the people's will. 
Later, the people of Al-Najaf welcomed the American forces 
when they realized that they were not against the Iraqis, 
but rather are there to confront the tyrant. This is 
democracy. The people of Al-Najaf did not throw stones at 
the Americans, and the Americans did not fire a bullet. The 
American soldiers expressed their respect for the holy 
sites. [W]hen will the Arabs defend their holy sites, 
instead of defending their dictators?" 
 
¶4.  Conservative Dr. Sami Khalifa wrote in independent Al- 
Rai Al-Aam (4/5): "In light of the marginalization of the 
Iraqi opposition, the targeting of Iraq's infrastructure and 
the suffering of the Iraqi people. [w]e have no other choice 
but to ally ourselves with the other Arab and Muslim nations 
to condemn American insensitivity for practicing this 
scorched earth policy before toppling the Iraqi regime." 
 
¶5.  "Who to Believe?" 
Ahmad Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (4/6): 
"[British Prime Minister] Blair stated that the UN will play 
a major role in the reconstruction of Iraq, while we heard 
the Deputy US Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz state that 
the UN could play the role of facilitator. [W]e notice that 
there is a discrepancy between the two countries, and that 
leads me to wonder who to believe?" 
 
¶6.  "A Peaceful Word in a Boiling Street" 
Editor-in-Chief, Jassim Boodai, wrote in independent Al-Rai 
Al-Aam (4/3): "Arabs and Muslims have the right to 
demonstrate against the strikes on Iraqi civilians and 
against American double-standard policies. The Arab Street 
has the right to refuse to believe the Americans who started 
their campaign by eliminating Iraq's WMDs, and proceeded to 
develop their goals to eliminate the Iraqi regime, then to 
remove national governance of Iraq after toppling the regime 
and replacing it with an American military governor. The 
American's final step is to obliterate all maps of the 
region by announcing the planning of a new Middle East. The 
turmoil in the seething of the Arab Streets is justified, 
but the split of tracks between reality and slogans only 
serves the US in the long run. We have to say a peaceful 
word to a boiling street.  Help the Iraqis and do not help 
their regime. Help the Iraqis establish a democratic 
national system free of WMDs and foreign military presence. 
As for what is taking place now, it only serves the current 
Iraqi regime and the coming American military presence." 
 
¶7.  "When Will Al-Sahaf Admit Defeat?" 
Lawyer Jamal Al-Kandari wrote in independent Al-Watan (4/6): 
"Today's war is different from previous wars. Television 
correspondents today are in the heart of the battlefield. 
They monitor and report every movement of the [American] 
army. [Iraqi Minister of Information] Al-Sahaf denies much 
of this news. When the coalition forces took Umm Qasr, he 
stated that the city is resisting.  The same scenario 
happened in Al-Basra and other cities and places.  Al-Sahaf 
will continue his denials and lies until the day the 
[coalition] forces reach him and take him to Guantanamo 
Bay." 
 
 
JONES