This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 002908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, JUNE 28-30: PROSPECTS FOR 
CEASEFIRE; MIDEAST REFORM; PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS; WORLD 
ECONOMIC FORUM; IRAQ; US-IRAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: A top Kuwaiti official said Kuwait welcomes 
the ceasefire by three Palestinian factions saying, "Hamas' 
position has changed, and we welcome this positive change." 
One commentator writes that Israel bears most of the 
responsibility for whether the ceasefire will lead to a 
lasting settlement. Another sees the World Economic Forum 
meeting held in Jordan last week as part of a "Great Road 
Map" in support of a "Zionist-American project to create a 
new Middle East. to be integrated into the Zionist economy." 
 
Two commentators address the issue of reform in the region, 
feeling that change is necessary to combat terrorism and to 
"modernize." On the news pages, the Ministry of Education 
announced an effort to "review" the educational curricula in 
Kuwaiti schools. 
 
In the lead-up to parliamentary elections, a vote-buying 
scandal was exposed this week, and one daily published the 
conservative Islamist Salafi Movement's platform that 
includes planks on gender segregation in schools and an end 
to foreign troops in Kuwait. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that Sheikh Khaled 
Salman Al-Jarallah, Undersecretary of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, said Kuwait welcomes the cease-fire, and: 
"Kuwait's official position towards Hamas has not changed. 
Rather, Hamas' position has changed, and we welcome this 
positive change." 
 
On June 28, Al-Qabas front-paged a vote-buying scandal in 
which a parliamentary candidate was caught receiving money 
from a constituent. The candidate, who was reportedly paying 
KD 500 (approximately USD 1500) to those who would vote for 
him, will face criminal charges. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam published an outline of the "the reformist 
vision" of the conservative Islamist Salafi Movement 
electoral platform which includes: the removal of foreign 
military presence from Kuwait; the development of Kuwait's 
unexploited northern oil fields "without the hegemony of 
foreign companies;" and the segregation of students by 
gender at all educational levels, including at foreign 
schools. 
 
Al-Watan published comments by a conservative parliamentary 
candidate saying, "liberals cover up their weaknesses by 
levelling accusations against Islamists." Al-Rai Al-Aam 
reports that another candidate stated that, "Privatization 
is a Jewish scheme for taking over the region." 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that Mubarak Al-Mutawa, a Kuwaiti 
human rights activist and the Secretary General of the 
International Islamic Committee for Human Rights, stated at 
a human rights conference in Belgium that, "Kuwait's 
reputation in the sphere of human rights is very good." 
 
Al-Watan reports on June 30 public comments by the Assistant 
Undersecretary for Educational Research and Curriculm of the 
Ministry of Education, Dr. Mohammad Al-Musaileen announcing 
a Ministry plan to review the Kuwaiti educational curricula 
to "explore the strengths and the weaknesses" of the current 
curricula. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on June 30 that the Council of Ministers 
ratified draft Amiri Decrees for the establishment of four 
private universities and colleges in Kuwait. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Terrorism's Warm Havens" 
Saud Al-Samaka wrote in independent Al-Qabas (6/28):  "Our 
schools are overflowing with terrorist culture, and sources 
of financing [for terrorists in the Gulf] are limitless. Our 
government admits that there are hundreds of charitable 
committees collecting money without any legal cover. The 
locomotive of change is drawing near, and Iraq will be the 
model of this coming era of progress. Therefore, we must be 
prepared for what is coming and deal with it with 
transparency." 
 
¶4.  "Separation of Powers" 
Liberal editor-in-chief Mohammed Al-Jassim wrote in 
independent Al-Watan (6/28):  "The stability of a political 
system is vital for development. Our country paid dearly for 
instability. Since the beginning of the constitutional era, 
we have argued about democracy, the constitution and the 
freedom of press in vain. Despite all appearances of 
progress and prosperity, the problem is upon us." 
 
¶5.  "The Great Road Map" 
Hamed Al-Ali wrote in independent Al-Watan (6/28):  "How can 
this criminal entity [Israel] continue to violate all that 
other countries are asked to respect, be it on human rights 
issues, WMD, UN resolutions, or impinging on other 
countries' sovereignty, and still have a leading role at the 
recent [World Economic Forum] held in Amman? It was clear 
that America and the Zionist entity were the main two 
players. [and that] the Zionist-American project wants to 
create a new Middle East to serve as a `supermarket' to be 
integrated into the Zionist economy. The role of the Zionist- 
Americans is to see the implementation of the Great Road 
Map, with the Zionists in control." 
 
¶6.  "The Map, If You Please" 
Liberal Salah Al-Sayer wrote in independent Al-Anba (6/28): 
"Many Gulf citizens believe in the status quo, and don't 
consider the need for a reform road map presented by the 
American Administration. To believe in the status quo is to 
be shortsighted. The region is in flux, constants are 
changing rapidly, and therefore, it is wise to pick up the 
threads of change. The Gulf region is no exception: it is 
ideologically antiquated like the rest of the region and in 
need of a road map of reforms to modernize it. Events in 
Iraq affirm that America is a close neighbor, and a big 
sister." 
 
¶7.  "Loyalty to the Coalition" 
Naser Al-Otaibi wrote in independent Al-Seyassah ((6/29): 
"The liberation of Iraq from the grip of a tyrant after 
thirty-five years is God's blessing, and a great victory for 
the Iraqi people. This could not have been realized without 
the courage of President Bush and the support of Prime 
Minister Tony Blair. People of Iraq, do not rush the 
departure of the coalition forces, because if they leave the 
forces of evil will rise again." 
 
¶8.  "For the Truce to Achieve Peace." 
Dr. Ayed Al-Manaa wrote in independent Al-Watan (6/30): 
"The success of the truce between the Palestinians and 
Israelis which was mediated by the United States, is a 
positive step. This truce can be a permanent window to 
peace. Israel bears most of the responsibility since it is 
the one that usurps Palestinian land, including Jerusalem, 
refuses the return of Palestinian refugees, and builds 
illegal settlements. Therefore, if Israel seriously commits 
itself to the truce, not only will it win American and 
European approval, but also successive Arab recognition, and 
will gradually emerge from regional isolation. If not, then 
a new window of hell will open and only extremists from both 
sides will benefit." 
 
¶9.  "The American-Iranian Dispute" 
Dr. Shamlan Al-Issa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (6/30): 
"It is not in the interests of Gulf countries for the 
American-Iranian dispute to escalate. However, the United 
States will not pursue a new war in the region, especially 
as President Bush is heading towards elections in seventeen 
months. His main focus now is to improve the economy in his 
country in order to win public opinion and votes." 
 
JONES