This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 000445 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
COMMERCE FOR ITA JEAN KELLY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/07/2013 
TAGS: PREL ECON BM
SUBJECT: JAPAN ON BURMA: WE WANT A SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP TOO 
 
REF: A. TOKYO 1194 
 
     ¶B. 02 RANGOON 1447 
     ¶C. 02 RANGOON 1366 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN MARTINEZ FOR REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Minutes from a short meeting between the 
Japanese Ambassador and the Burmese Minister of National 
Planning and Economic Development emphasize the new 
pro-engagement policy outlined by the Japanese at the recent 
ICG meeting in Tokyo.  The Ambassador's remarks give some 
insight into Japan's vision of its policy in Burma, both 
bilateral and as part of the larger Japan-ASEAN relationship. 
 End summary. 
 
Japan Stresses its Independence 
 
¶2. (C) In a meeting on February 21, the Japanese Ambassador 
to Burma reiterated to the Minister of Economic Development 
and National Planning, U Soe Tha, Japan's determination to 
push ahead with a more ambitious policy of engagement with 
Burma.  According to classified GOB minutes of this meeting, 
the Japanese Ambassador also gave the Minister a short 
readout of the Tokyo Informal Consultative Group (ICG) 
meeting that took place on February 15 (described in Ref A). 
 
¶3. (C) The minutes record that the Ambassador reported the 
ICG's conclusion that the United States, the United Kingdom, 
and "western groups" have not been succesful in trying to 
pressure Burma.  Instead, the international community should 
try a new "way" of extending more assistance to Burma.  In 
that spirit, the Ambassador told the Minister Japan will 
provide more humanitarian assistance and advice on economic 
reform and political development.  He added that Japan will 
begin to take action regardless of what other nations decide 
to do.  The Ambassador stressed that other countries and 
international organizations are seeking their own ways to 
start assisting Burma.  However, even if the international 
community does not join in, Japan will carry out its 
intentions -- even if the Japanese government has to 
"confront challenges" to do so. 
 
¶4. (C) The Japanese Ambassador, according to the minutes, 
went on to say that Japan must consider its relations with 
Burma in the larger context of Japan-ASEAN ties, and 
strengthening the influence of ASEAN.  Somewhat more 
cryptically, the minutes record the Japanese Ambassador 
urging the Minister to ponder seriously the importance of 
Burma's relations with India and the PRC. 
 
¶5. (C) The Minister replied to the Ambassador quite 
positively, complimenting him for his understanding of the 
"true situation" in the country.  He urged the Ambassador to 
work hard to ensure the Japanese government would soon carry 
out the policy that had been outlined. 
 
Ties that Bind? 
 
¶6. (C) The Ambassador's approach to the Minister dovetails 
very well with the strong new position of engagement laid out 
by the Japanese delegation at the ICG.  The only disconnect 
between the two was the mention of using greater engagement 
to encourage political dialogue; a theme Japan supported at 
the ICG, but which the Ambassador apparently failed to 
mention during his meeting with U Soe Tha.  The Ambassador's 
assertion that Japan will act independently of other parties, 
and his remarks on the importance of Japan's ties with ASEAN, 
and thus Burma, might be interpreted as a reminder by the 
Ambassador of Japan's importance as a regional power -- 
competing as it is with the aggressive diplomacy in Burma of 
China and India. 
Martinez