This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KUWAIT 004433 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT:  KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION AUGUST 18-24 
 
SUMMARY:  Harsh criticism of the recent US UNSC veto is 
evident on the op/ed pages of Kuwait's Arabic dailies, with 
numerous denunciations of "American arrogance and double 
standards" in the Arab world, and attendant calls to 
reevaluate the US-Kuwait bilateral relationship. 
 
Tensions between Kuwaiti Islamists and liberals have come to 
the fore over the Ministry of Information's decision to 
allow a pop music concert by young Arab singers over the 
objections of religious conservatives.  Despite opposition 
(including a peaceful demonstration of 50 Islamists and a 
bomb hoax) concert tickets were sold out.  Several liberal 
NGOs issued statements rejecting the Islamists' effort to 
"exercise control over society by resorting to intellectual 
terrorism."  End summary. 
 
Reportage 
 
All newspapers published a statement by the Islamic Salafi 
movement denouncing the Central Bank's compliance with a 
State Department request to freeze the accounts of Islamic 
Jihad and Hamas.  The movement described the act as an 
example of "Zionist infiltration" of Kuwait. 
 
Al-Seyassa reported that a former Iraqi soldier who claims 
to have been ordered to kill 40 Kuwaiti POWs is attempting 
to claim $1 million offered by the Kuwaiti government to 
anyone who could direct Kuwait authorities to the 
whereabouts of the POWs. 
 
All newspapers gave prominent coverage to reports that two 
Muslim members of the US military have been accused of 
espionage in Guantanamo. 
 
Al-Qabas published a report indicating extreme violations in 
executing criminal sentences.  According to these documents, 
there are 13,000 criminal sentences that have not been 
implemented in Kuwait, with many accused of serious crimes 
walking the streets. 
 
All newspapers reported the death of a Kuwaiti F-18 pilot 
whose plane crashed near Ahmed Al-Jaber Airbase.  An 
investigation is ongoing to discover the cause of the crash. 
 
Al-Seyassa & Al-Qabas reported that a senior Shiite Cleric, 
Mohammed Al-Mahri, issued a fatwa arguing that raising the 
Israeli flag in Dubai is "haram" or religiously forbidden 
and so is trading with Israel. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reported that the Ministry of Awqaf and 
Islamic Affairs is sending a delegation to the United States 
to visit Islamic centers and organizations from October 2- 
¶19. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reported that the United States has asked 
Kuwait for the privilege of participating in the Al-Zoor 
power plant project and has also requested priority for 
American companies in the Northern Oil Fields project. 
Sources noted that this request follows a Kuwait response to 
be named one of America's major non-NATO allies. 
 
Al-Qabas published a report by the International Committee 
to combat terrorism which reveals that Kuwaiti laws for 
monitoring the financial transactions of charitable 
organizations are insufficient.  The committee forwarded 
several questions to the Ministry of Social Affairs with a 
90 day deadline to answer them. 
 
Al-Qabas reported that Ministry of Social Affairs is 
preparing to wage a comprehensive campaign on charity 
organizations to confirm that they are abiding by 
regulations. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Towards a Democratic Position" 
Liberal Abdul-Latif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(9/21):  "The legitimacy of holding the Super Star concert 
is inspired from Kuwait's democratic system and from the 
constitution which guarantees individual freedoms and 
commits the country to foster different forms of art. 
Whether the concert is or isn't popular among Kuwaitis this 
is besides the point.  The point is that it is my right and 
the rights of others to attend and enjoy the concert.  This 
same argument is true for granting women political rights.. 
Reexamining these issues is similar to scorning the 
principles of our democratic constitution." 
 
¶4.  "Slave traders of the Twenty First Century" 
Former Minister and MP, liberal Ahmed Al-Baghli wrote in 
independent Al-Qabas (9/23):  "International laws forbid 
human trafficking and impose strong penalties for countries 
suspected of such a horrific trade..  As someone who is 
concerned with human rights issues, I am always encountering 
accusations made against Kuwait for mistreating expatriate 
labor, especially domestic servants..  What supports such 
accusations is an add that recently ran in a local 
advertising newspaper which states `for sale, a Filipino 
Muslim maid for KD 350, price is negotiable.'..  We can on 
Kuwaiti authorities and officials to put an end to such 
inhumane and irresponsible acts committed by fellow Kuwaitis 
and published in our newspapers.  Those who published such 
an ad did not fear any punishment, that is why they went 
ahead with their act." 
 
¶5.  "After the two parties" 
Prominent Islamist Mohammed Al-Shaibani wrote in independent 
Al-Qabas (9/23):  "The coming few days will witness a very 
strong conflict between the liberals and the Islamists, 
perhaps stronger than any time before.  The conflict aims at 
establishing political hegemony.  The liberals may achieve 
some victories, especially since Kuwait has become a major 
US non-Nato ally.  Islamists, on the other hand, may lose a 
lot if they do not deal with their local issues with 
calmness and rationale.  They must also cooperate with the 
legislative and the executive authorities, especially since 
the government has not yet given its view on issues raised 
by the Islamists and when it does, such views may be too 
harsh on them." 
 
¶6.  "Enthusiasm for their Injustice" 
Islamist Adel Al-Qassar wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(9/23):  "Ongoing American charities estimated at billions 
of dollars are sent to Israeli Jews to enable them to 
maintain the land they usurped and to exercise brutality and 
oppression against the Palestinian fighters.  Meanwhile, 
terrorism has now become synonymous with Islam and Muslims 
and now accusations are made against their charitable 
organizations to dry the sources of their funding and 
eliminate their existence.  Fostering an orphan, helping the 
poor, feeding the hungry, and financing the families of 
martyrs in Palestine are now considered terrorist acts 
punishable by law.  Now in Kuwait we are faced with an 
American request to freeze the assets of Palestinian 
resistance groups.  The decision to stop all aid is absolute 
to include `all financial and moral assistance.'  Now we are 
left to wonder what constitutes moral assistance, unless 
this includes praying that God may relieve the oppressed and 
praying at the funerals of martyrs?  What is left that we 
are authorized to do other than eat and sleep like animals?" 
 
¶7.  "Take Two" 
Bader Khaled Al-Bahar wrote in independent Al-Qabas (9/23): 
"Hollywood's scenario in the Middle East have become very 
clear.  It starts with an Arab country clashing interests 
with the U.S., or in reality, the Hebrew state.  This is 
followed by an attack and a reaction to an attack.  This is 
followed by condemnation of terrorism, an accusation of 
ownership of WMDs and an embargo and an air raid.  The last 
episode involves chaos, the disappearance of the criminal 
who turns into an evil spirit that continues to haunt the 
hero with video taped massages.  Such was the scenario in 
Afghanistan, Libya and in Iraq..  Take four will be in 
Damascus because Syria is accused with all the factors that 
qualifies her to become the hero for the new American 
scenario.  It refuses to negotiate with Israel and according 
to US claims, it harbors the terrorists of Hezbollah and 
Jihad and Hamas and develops WMDs..  The fifth take will be 
in Saudi Arabia because 15 of the 19 perpetrators of 
September 11 were Saudis and a recent report prepared by 
Congress links the Kingdom with terrorism." 
 
¶8.  "A Strategic Ally" 
Dr. Hasan Abdullah Abbas wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(9/23):  "In his recent press conference from Kuwait, 
Secretary Powell announced that Kuwait played a prominent 
 
SIPDIS 
role in the war to liberate (occupy) Iraq and it is 
therefore a "strategic" non-Nato ally..  The stubbornness 
and challenge the US faces in the region has become 
unacceptable and has necessitated forming "strategic" non- 
NATO alliances.  The Americans want an effective element 
within Arab and Islamic countries able to influence and 
facilitate passing American policies in the region.  Do our 
Kuwaiti officials accept such a label?  I would like to 
remind our politicians that Kuwait is still part of the 
Islamic world.  I would also like to remind them that the 
U.S. is preparing a new project that antagonizes Arab and 
Islamic countries, the most prominent of which are Syria and 
Iran..  Let us also remember that the U.S. is still the 
official international and official umbrella for acts and 
killings perpetrated by the Zionist entity against the 
Palestinian children." 
 
¶9.  "The Dinosaur and the Swamp" 
Conservative Academician Dr. Jassim Al-Fuhaid wrote in 
independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (9/23):  "There is are better 
words to describe America other than what Iranian leader 
Rafsanjani used when he compared it to a dinosaur with a 
bird's brain.   This dinosaur's dilemma is multi-faceted. 
While politicians are still trying to figure out how to 
govern Iraq, the military nature of the US presence there 
sheds doubt as to the nature of the alleged liberation. 
Excessive use of force with the Iraqi people, has led to 
increasing the antagonism with the Iraqis..  Also, excessive 
arrogance has led the U.S. into more conflicts..  America is 
now attempting to draw its allies to pay for its expensive 
bill for occupying Iraq, but it is met with continuous 
resistance because no one wants to fall in the Iraqi swamp." 
 
¶10.  "The Foolish Veto" 
Shiite MP Abdul-Mohsen Yousef Jamal wrote in independent Al- 
Qabas (9/20):  "I do not know what constitutes the moral 
basis of the recent U.S. veto in the UNSC which aimed at 
putting a stop to the Israeli foolishness that has 
transcended all taboos of killing and destructions.  The 
U.S. veto represents American recklessness in dealing with 
humanitarian values and a disrespect for the lives of 
innocent Palestinians killed daily by Israeli raids waged 
using American planes..  American arrogance has reached a 
level of foolishness by allowing the criminal Sharon to kill 
anyone he wants without being held accountable and to 
violate human rights without punishment..  Washington is 
trying to make it clear to the Arab and Muslim worlds that 
its is that sole superpower and that it dictates the rules 
of the political game, even if this means killing innocent 
people..  It is telling the Palestinians that no country 
will come to your aid and that they must accept American 
conditions, or in other words, Israeli conditions. 
Meanwhile, Washington is sending a clear message to Tel Aviv 
that whatever Israel does to the Palestinians, America will 
support it in the Security Council." 
 
JONES