This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002812 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL TU CY
SUBJECT: TURKEY/CYPRUS: TURKS ENCOURAGED BY FREE FLOW OF 
PEOPLE ON ISLAND BUT WORRIED GREEK CYPRIOTS TRYING TO 
UNDERMINE UNFICYP 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reason: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Turkish MFA is encouraged by the flow of 
people between the two sides on Cyprus and plans to open 
additional gates.  Nevertheless, MFA is concerned that the 
Greek Cypriots are attempting to restrict UNFICYP's important 
role in the buffer zone, which would undermine the current 
positive atmosphere on the island.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) MFA Cyprus DG Ertugrul Apakan summoned US and UK reps 
to discuss the flow of people between the two sides.  Apakan 
averred that Turkey views positively the large numbers of 
people who have traveled to the north and south.  Noting that 
there has been only one security incident thus far, Apakan 
explained that according to Turkish figures since April 23, 
107,125 Greek Cypriots and 29,613 Turkish Cypriots have 
crossed to the other side.  Turkey wants to maintain the 
current positive atmosphere on Cyprus and has no intention to 
rescind allowing passage between the two sides, he said. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Apakan noted that Turkish Cypriot authorities are now 
allowing tourists to stay in the north for three days and 
plan to open a total of four gates on the Turkish Cypriot 
side.  In response to DCM's query on where Turkish policies 
will lead, Apakan replied that Turkey wants to remove 
barriers to a lasting, negotiated solution.  Apakan cited 
what he said was F.M. Gul's recent statement in Brussels that 
Turkey "wants to bridge gaps and differences based on the 
Annan Plan" but stopped short of embracing the UNSYG's plan. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Nevertheless, Apakan noted, there are unsubstantiated 
reports that some groups are trying to create provocations 
that could spoil the current environment.  Apakan claimed 
that unions are attempting to organize potentially 
destabilizing demonstrations on May 1 and that Greek Cypriot 
motorcyclists may plan some unspecified "unhelpful" action. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Even more troubling to Turkey, Apakan explained, is an 
apparent statement by the Greek Cypriot Interior Minister 
calling for UNFICYP to cease its role in regulating the 
buffer zones between border gates.  Apakan explained that 
although they do not perform any inspections themselves, UN 
peacekeepers in the buffer zone play a vital role in 
facilitating the free passage of Greek and Turkish Cypriots 
between sides -- a role, he said, which is within the 
existing UNFICYP mandate.  Apakan repeatedly stressed that 
GOT wants UNFICYP to stay and maintain its current functions. 
 He further noted that Turkish missions abroad will be 
contacting USG, UN, and UK officials to convey Turkish 
sensitivities.  We indicated that the U.S. would continue to 
support UNFICYP fulfilling its mandate and promised to inform 
the Dept and USUN of Turkey's concerns. 
PEARSON