This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031446Z Jul 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001359 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
BANGKOK FOR WIN DAYTON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ZI MDC
SUBJECT: MDC OFFICIALS REFLECT ON MASS ACTION - SUCCESSES 
AND FAILURES 
 
REF: A. HARARE 1161 
 
     ¶B. HARARE 1149 
     ¶C. HARARE 1136 
     ¶D. HARARE 1122 
     ¶E. HARARE 1101 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) MDC Presidential Advisor Gandi Mudzingwa and MDC MP 
Roy Bennett both said recently that the June mass action was 
a success overall, but suffered from organizational problems 
that the party is resolving.  Mudzingwa thought the problems 
were due to too many MPs becoming involved in key 
decision-making, but Bennett said parallel local MDC 
structures competed for resources, preventing adequate 
organizing for the mass action.  It would appear that 
although the MDC would like to send the outward message that 
the June mass action was a resounding success, they 
acknowledge organizational and command and control problems 
that detracted from its overall impact.  End Summary. 
 
Too Many Cooks 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Mudzingwa said the MDC viewed the June mass action as 
a success primarily because it forced Mugabe to use security 
forces against the populace.  This was a sign that Mugabe 
acknowledges that the populace in sufficient numbers is 
sufficiently willing to protest so as to require a show of 
military force to prevent public protest.  Gandi said that in 
contrast to the previous mass action, over which he had 
primary command and control, this most recent mass action 
suffered from too many others becoming involved in key 
decision-making.  As a result of the success of the March 
2003 stayaway, many MDC MPs wanted to get into the limelight, 
and in on decision-making, for the June mass action.  Hence 
some bad decisions were made; in particular, public comments 
(like Tsvangirai's "Final Push" speech) were not cleared 
properly.  Though scolding those responsible would be 
destructive at this point, Gandi said the party did have a 
plan to sort out decision-making and planning was already 
underway for future mass action. 
 
Parallel Local Structures Counterproductive 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) On July 2 MDC MP Roy Bennett told Poloff the June mass 
action was a success, but suffered from organizational 
problems.  MDC Action Committees received funding from party 
headquarters to plan for the mass action and organize at the 
local level.  Bennett said that Mudzingwa spearheaded the 
creation of these committees in February 2002 to organize for 
the March 2003 mass action.  Bennett said these committees 
were set up alongside existing party structures.  The two 
groups apparently competed against one another for funding 
and control, and significant resentment arose.  In some 
cases, each group informed police of the other's activities 
and police subsequently cracked down on one or the other, 
negating both groups' efforts to organize the people for mass 
action.  According to Bennett, the Zimbabwean people heeded 
the call to protest, but the party leaders and organizers did 
not show up in significant numbers to galvanize people who 
had gathered into marches.  Bennett said this problem has led 
to resentment between some elected MPs and Mudzingwa and 
technocrats under his leadership.  The issue was hotly 
debated at the recent MDC executive meeting, and the two 
local structures are subsequently being incorporated and the 
MDC's reach hopefully deepened in the process.  Bennett also 
confirmed that future mass actions were being planned. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶4. (C) It appears that although the MDC would like to send 
the outward message that the June mass action was a 
resounding success, they acknowledge internally that there 
were shortcomings in its organization that detracted from its 
overall impact.  The Party's message leading up to the mass 
action was ambiguous and led to exaggerated expectations of 
what could be achieved and consequent disappointment that no 
breakthrough in Zimbabwe's crisis was achieved.  It would 
also appear there are internal power struggles and 
differences of opinion which need to be resolved before the 
party undertakes further mass action.  End Comment. 
SULLIVAN