This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002862 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR E, EB, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA 
STATE PASS NSC FOR QUANRUD AND BRYZA 
USDOC FOR 4212/ITA/MAC/OEURA/CPD/DDEFALCO 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/30/2013 
TAGS: ECON ETRD EAIR PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: TURKISH MFA ON IRAQ RECONSTRUCTION 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 2817 
 
 
Classified by EconCouns Scot Marciel, Reason 1.5 (b,d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  MFA Director for Iraq Reconstruction Okcun 
told EconCouns April 29 that Turkey would pursue an 
aggressive private/public sector approach to winning 
reconstruction contracts in Iraq.  He asked if the U.S. could 
help by dispelling the notion that Turkish firms were at a 
disadvantage due to Turkey,s stance on the war, and by 
"matchmaking" between Turkish and U.S. firms.  Okcun noted 
that Turkey hoped to normalize trade relations with Iraq as 
soon as possible, and would reopen its embassy in Baghdad the 
week of May 5.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) EconCouns met April 29 with MFA Director for Iraq 
Reconstruction Ambassador Okcun, DDG for Bilateral Economic 
Affairs for the Middle East/Africa Kaya Turkmen, and DDG for 
Bilateral Economic Affairs for the West Mehmet Gucuk.  Okcun 
noted that the MFA,s goal was to help secure the 
participation of Turkish companies in the reconstruction of 
Iraq through aggressive "public/private sector teamwork." 
The MFA had already established a permanent commission of 
eight members -- four from the private sector, four from the 
state sector -- to work on Iraq reconstruction issues.  The 
commission would convene regular meetings to discuss 
opportunities and challenges in key sectors, i.e. 
transportation, banking, and oil. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Okcun noted that participating in Iraq reconstruction 
would be more difficult for Turkish firms than it had been in 
Afghanistan.  He said the GOT would pursue an aggressive 
approach, and would encourage the private sector to do the 
same.  He asked if the U.S. could help in this effort by 
taking steps to dispel the persistent notion in the press and 
the private sector that Turkish firms were at a disadvantage 
due to Turkey,s stance on the war.  Okcun also requested 
U.S. assistance in "matchmaking" between Turkish and U.S. 
firms, perhaps by organizing a reconstruction conference in 
Turkey, as we had done in the Afghanistan case. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Okcun noted that Turkey planned to resume normal trade 
relations with Iraq as soon as possible.  To this end, the 
government hoped to open a second border gate to help ease 
the traffic through Harbur gate, but needed an interlocutor 
on the Iraqi side in order to proceed with the plan.  Okcun 
said the GOT also hoped to extend a railway line directly 
across the Iraqi border.  The current railway system, he 
said, went through Syria first and then into Iraq.  He 
expected Turkish Airlines would also be interested in 
resuming flights to Baghdad whenever that became possible. 
 
 
¶5. (C) On other Iraq-related issues, DG Turkmen noted that 
the GOT was planning on reopening its embassy -- staffed with 
a skeleton crew for now -- in Baghdad the week of May 5. 
Okcun said he understood that other countries were planning 
on sending representatives to work with ORHA, and Turkey also 
wanted to one to two officials.  He said the MFA would 
contact us when its proposal was more firm.  Okcun claimed 
there was an understanding following Secretary Powell,s 
visit that we would help arrange a meeting for GOT officials 
with General Garner.  He said the GOT was willing to send a 
delegation to Baghdad as soon as possible for such a meeting. 
PEARSON