This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, INL, DRL, PRM, AND IWI 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG ELAB ASEC PREF KFRD HO
SUBJECT: HONDURAS AND PROSPECTS FOR HARMONIZED ANTI-TIP 
LEGISLATION IN CENTRAL AMERICA 
 
REF: A. STATE 32314 
     ¶B. GUATEMALA 489 
     ¶C. TEGUCIGALPA 650 
     ¶D. STATE 22225 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Post concurs with Department 
recommendation that a regional harmonization of 
anti-trafficking in persons legislation (ref A) would serve 
U.S. interests in Honduras and the region.  As stated in ref 
C, Honduras could benefit by an overriding law against TIP 
that pieced together aspects of various laws and filled in 
the blanks to cover all possible offenses. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  The following responses are keyed to questions in 
ref A: 
 
a)  Willingness of key national legislators to introduce and 
promote harmonized anti-TIP legislation, or in the 
alternative, to amend existing statutes where necessary: 
 
-- As stated in ref C, the Maduro Administration is planning 
to introduce to Congress a draft immigration bill that would 
strengthen penalties against trafficking in persons, 
especially the trafficking of children.  Maduro's Nationalist 
Party has only a plurality, not a majority, within the 
unicameral body.  While Post believes that members of the 
Nationalist Party, opposition Liberal Party, and smaller 
parties would support ant-TIP legislation, Post will have a 
better sense of the reaction in Congress once the new 
immigration law is introduced.  National and municipal 
elections will not be held until November 2005.  Prospects 
for passage of anti-TIP harmonization legislation will be 
better in 2003/2004 than 2005. 
 
b)  Openness of national legislature and government to work 
with neighboring governments, NGOs, and IOs to maintain 
harmony of essential elements of an anti-TIP bill: 
 
-- Post believes that the GOH is likely to be open to 
regional cooperation with other governments, international 
organizations, and NGOs, although Post notes that Honduras 
does have border disputes with its three Central American 
land neighbors (and its seven maritime neighbors).  The 
disputes with El Salvador and Nicaragua are the most heated. 
Maduro is personally engaged with his presidential 
counterparts to address these issues but there has not been 
much concrete progress, except for the March 11 vote of the 
Nicaraguan Congress to suspend its 35 percent tariff on 
Honduran imports.  Despite these border disputes, Post 
believes that the GOH would work with neighboring governments 
on this issue, which the GOH recognizes is a regional problem. 
 
c)  Prospects for passage, including length of time needed 
for enactment, of an harmonized anti-TIP bill: 
 
-- Post believes that prospects for passage are reasonably 
good, although Post notes that the Honduran Congress rarely 
acts quickly on legislation.  It is possible that some 
legislators may either portray TIP as a U.S. problem, or be 
afraid to make anti-TIP laws tougher because of the potential 
impact on remittances if fewer Hondurans immigrate to the 
U.S.  Also, endemic corruption in Honduras could potentially 
complicate passage of stricter legislation. 
 
d) Impact of a legislative debate on TIP in Honduras, 
regardless of final passage: 
 
-- Congressional debate would raise awareness not only among 
legislators but also among opinion makers and the general 
public.  It would be a boost to the GOH agencies and NGOs 
that are combating TIP. 
Palmer