This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 002595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FAA HDQRS FOR CARL BURLESON 
BRUSSELS FOR FAA 
USDOC FOR 4220/MAC/EUR/SED/DDEFALCO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ETRD ECON IT EUN FAA AVIATION
SUBJECT: AIRPORT NOISE IN ITALY: NO IMMINENT NIGHT FLIGHT 
RESTRICTIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 115832 
     ¶B. ROME 1229 
     ¶C. STATE 29193 
 
(U)  This message is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
handle accordingly.  Not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary. Environment Ministry officials, in 
contrast to their previous statements, told U.S. industry 
representatives in a recent meeting that there are currently 
no plans to ban night flights in Italy.  Officials from 
Italy's Civil Aviation Authority confirmed that a 1999 
Presidential Decree banning night flights in Italy is not in 
force.  The Transportation Ministry has been granted an 
advisory role on the implementation of the EU Airport Noise 
Directive.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  On Tuesday, May 20, representatives from FedEx, DHL 
and United Technologies met with officials from the Ministry 
of the Environment and from Italy's Civil Aviation Authority 
(ENAC) to discuss the GOI's implementation of the EU Airport 
Noise Directive and its adherence to ICAO's balanced approach. 
 
Ministry of the Environment 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  Participants: 
Nazzareno Penna, Director, Office of Acoustic Pollution 
Lucio De Carolis, Technical Expert on Noise Pollution 
Darcy Nicolle, United Technologies 
Ralph Carter, FedEx 
Morgan Foulkes, DHL 
David Mulenex, Science Counselor 
Jessamyn Allen, Economic Officer 
David Reimer, Consulate Milan 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  In contrast with our March meeting (Ref B), Penna 
appeared amicable and familiar with both the ICAO balanced 
approach and the EU Directive on airport noise, often quoting 
parts of the EU Directive to the group in support of his 
statements.  At the same time, Penna expressed his belief 
that the four elements (1) reduction of noise at source; (2) 
land use planning and management; (3) operating procedure, 
and (4) operating restrictions, were not/not listed in 
priority order.  While stating that there were no plans at 
present to ban night flights in Italy (a change from his 
previous statements), Penna reminded us that his constituents 
were the environment and the Italian people and not industry 
or airports. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  After the industry group walked Penna through UK 
and French airport noise studies, he said that he was open to 
a dialogue with industry and explained that it might also be 
useful for the industry team to meet with the appropriate 
parties at the local level, including the airport committees 
and the twenty-one regional agencies of Italy's Environmental 
Protection Agency (APAT).  While supporting discussions at 
the local level, he underscored with us that his office made 
the final decision nationally on implementing the EU 
Directive. 
 
Italy's Civil Aviation Authority (ENAC) 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  Participants: 
Alessandro Cardi, Head of Regulation Service 
Franco Conte, Airport Planning 
Enrico Deodati, Office of Airport Coordination 
Darcy Nicolle, United Technologies 
Ralph Carter, FedEx 
Morgan Foulkes, DHL 
Jessamyn Allen, Economic Officer 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  As expected, ENAC officials expressed their 
support for ICAO's balanced approach and explained that they 
were still working on having the jurisdiction for 
implementing the EU Directive moved to the Ministry of 
Transportation, or at the least, giving the MOT an advisory 
role in the process.  (NOTE:  We were informed several days 
later that the Ministry of Transportation (and thus ENAC) had 
 
 
been granted this advisory role and would begin to work with 
the Ministry of the Environment on the implementation of the 
EU Directive.  End Note.) 
¶8.  (U)  During the meeting, ENAC officials explained the 
system of noise zones around the airports and told us that 
that airport noise studies are being conducted at all Italian 
airports with potential noise pollution problems.  At the end 
of the meeting, ENAC officials presented us with a copy of a 
Presidential Decree of 1999 banning night flights between 
2300 and 0600.  Several days later Cardi called to explain 
that this decree had been annulled and was not in effect as 
had previously been thought. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Comment. There appears to be no imminent threat of 
a GOI ban on night flights in Italy.  Moreover, with the 
Ministry of Transportation now having the authority to advise 
the Ministry of the Environment on the implementation of the 
EU Airport Noise Directive, the GOI is more likely to adhere 
to a balanced approach.  Embassy will monitor this issue 
closely and continue urging the GOI to avoid operating 
restrictions as a measure of first resort to control noise 
levels at airports.  End Comment. 
SKODON 
NNNN 
	2003ROME02595 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED