This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001582 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL JO
SUBJECT: WEEKEND DEMONSTRATIONS IN JORDAN SIZABLE, PEACEFUL 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 745 
 
     ¶B. AMMAN 974 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons: 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY.  The weekend of March 15-16 saw sizable 
GOJ-permitted demonstrations in Amman and Irbid as well as 
smaller gatherings in other locations.  The demonstrations 
were peaceful, with no security incidents reported. 
Estimates of crowd sizes varied widely, but reliable sources 
indicate that Amman saw approximately 3,000 participants 
while Irbid had as many as 2,000.  The message was largely 
standard: anti-USG policy, pro-Palestinian, and supportive of 
the Iraqi people.  However, both major demonstrations carried 
a new "theme" protesting rumored US troops in Jordan and the 
possibility that Jordan could be a "launch-pad" for allied 
action against Iraq.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C).  Credible media reports and embassy contacts present 
at the March 16 demonstration in Amman report that there were 
approximately 3,000 participants.  (Note: media reports put 
the number in Amman variously as 5,000, 10,000 and as high as 
25,000, but these estimates may reflect wishful thinking). 
The gathering in Amman, organized by the "Higher Coordination 
for Opposition Parties", traversed the well-worn march route 
from the Professional Association Headquarters to the United 
Nations offices in the Shmeisani district.  There was a heavy 
security presence.  Demonstrators chanted standard anti-USG 
rhetoric, rallied "against the war" and proclaimed their 
support for Palestinians and Iraqis.  According to media 
reports and embassy contacts, there were some vocal calls 
against American troops on Jordanian soil and against the 
possibility that America might use Jordan as a "launch-pad" 
into Iraq.  One media report indicated that a few slogans 
directly criticized PM Abul Ragheb (who in recent days has 
publicly dismissed rumors of USG troops in Jordan).  The 
peaceful demonstration lasted approximately one and a half 
hours and dispersed without incident.  One American 
journalist, who has been in Jordan several months and 
witnessed other demonstrations, described this one as "most 
unspectacular!" 
 
¶3. (SBU)  In Irbid, approximately 2,000 marched to a similar 
beat.  The demonstration, organized by the leftist "Jordanian 
People's Party", proceeded peacefully amidst a strong 
security presence.  Standard pro-Palestinian, anti-war 
rhetoric was salted with slogans decrying the "double 
standard" of USG policy and admonishments against allowing US 
troops on Jordanian soil. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Smaller gatherings occurred over the weekend without 
incident.  Embassy contacts report small, vocal gatherings of 
young adults (i.e. 30-50) in refugee camps.  (Note: the 
overall mood in the camps, despite lack of visible protests, 
is tense.)  On March 10, GOJ Department of Palestinian 
Affairs Director General Abdulkarim Abulhaija told RefCoord 
that he and the security services "are working day and night" 
to convince the refugee camps' political leaders -- both camp 
committees and leaders of various Palestinian factions -- 
that they should not take to the streets in the event of 
hostilities in Iraq.  According to Abulhaija, Palestinian 
refugees in Jordan view Saddam Hussein as a champion of the 
Palestinian cause and will view a US-led attack on Iraq as 
furtherance of a "Zionist agenda."  Abulhaija assured 
RefCoord that he and the security services are prepared to do 
everything in their power to maintain order in Jordan's 
refugee camps, but believes that it could be difficult. 
 
¶5. (C) In Jerash, the "political party organization 
committee" sponsored a "speech rally" on March 15 where IAF 
member Ali Leytoom reportedly delivered a polemic on the 
"conspiracy of the Zionist international movement" to a small 
audience (reportedly about a hundred people). 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (C)  These demonstrations were similar in size, message 
and behavior to previous anti-war demonstrations (reftels). 
The GOJ appears to be handling the gatherings well, allowing 
Jordanian anti-war organizers to coordinate their events with 
anti-war movements worldwide.  In general, our contacts hold 
the view that demonstrations here will likely remain tightly 
controlled and non-violent (despite the tension in the camps) 
unless the hot button issue of the Israel/Palestinian 
conflict flares up significantly. 
 
¶7. (C) Despite the lackluster rallies, the general public 
mood is hostile to the U.S., and especially so toward an 
attack on Iraq.  There is a core of organizers who hold even 
more deep-seated anti-U.S. views, and we are seeing more 
written tracts calling the U.S. the "number one enemy" of 
Arabs and Muslims.  This more radical minority will continue 
to express their anti-U.S. views, and could be tempted to 
take even more activist steps in the future. 
GNEHM