This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 000985 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/04/2013 
TAGS: MOPS PREL MARR CA NATO
SUBJECT: ISAF: CANADIAN RECONNAISSANCE TEAM VISIT 
 
REF: OTTAWA 540 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: Canada remains committed to providing a 
battle group and brigade headquarters to ISAF IV and V, but 
is making clear to potential partners that it will not serve 
as a lead or co-lead nation.  While hoping for a substantial 
NATO role, Canada expects that Germany will end up as lead 
nation for ISAF IV, and is discussing division of labor with 
the Bundeswehr.  Canada expects its area of responsibility to 
be western Kabul, the most insecure of the sectors now being 
patrolled by ISAF and the expected site of the constitutional 
Loya Jirga in October.  For sustainment purposes, Canada may 
need to shift its transport aircraft in theater from 
Operation Enduring Freedom to ISAF.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (C) A Canadian "strategic reconnaissance team" visited 
Afghanistan and Germany in late March to look at the security 
and political environment in which ISAF operates, and to 
discuss Canada's contributions to ISAF IV and V.  The 
Canadian team was led by BGEN Andrew Leslie and included 
representatives from National Defense (DND), Foreign Affairs 
(DFAIT), and International Development (CIDA). 
 
¶3. (C) Wendy Gilmour, DFAIT Deputy Director for Regional 
Security and Peacekeeping and a member of the Canadian team, 
told us on April 4 that they stressed with all interlocutors 
that Canada will not/not be lead or co-lead nation for ISAF 
IV and V.  Canada remains committed to being a "substantial 
partner" for those phases of ISAF, to include a battle group, 
a brigade headquarters, and a flag officer plus staff for 
ISAF headquarters, a total of 1500  personnel.  But the 
Canadian Forces do not have the resources to take on other 
tasks - e.g., airport operations and field hospitals - should 
gaps emerge, and therefore the GoC does not want to cast 
itself as a lead nation.  That said, Afghan officials and 
ISAF participants were delighted that Canada will be 
providing more boots on the ground.  German leadership has 
increased ISAF patrols this year, but this remains a deficit 
area. 
 
¶4. (C) Gilmour said that the German/Dutch Corps headquarters 
will depart ISAF in August in order to meet its NATO 
commitments.  While the Dutch expect to maintain little or no 
personnel for ISAF IV, the Germans will maintain a 
substantial presence.  Gilmour said that while both Canada 
and Germany hope NATO will play an increased role, the 
Bundeswehr believes it will fall to Germany to be the lead 
nation for ISAF IV.  GEN Reichman, head of Bundeswehr 
Operational Command, told the Canadians that his "emergency 
contingency plan" was for a divisional headquarters within 
the German/U.S. Corps to take the lead for ISAF IV.  Gilmour 
recognized that the German government has not yet made a 
decision about ISAF IV, and that the German MFA has not yet 
accepted the need for continuity of command. 
 
¶5. (C) German military officials were initially resistant to 
a Canadian brigade headquarters, given that Germany had 
planned to maintain their current brigade headquarters into 
ISAF IV.  But as the likelihood grows of serving as lead 
nation for ISAF IV, Gilmour said, the Germans have become 
more receptive to handing over the brigade headquarters 
function.  The Bundeswehr is sending a team to Canada on 
April 15 to discuss the requirements for transfer of brigade 
leadership. 
 
¶6. (C) Gilmour said that a decision brief on Canada's force 
composition for ISAF will be presented to Chief of Defense 
Staff GEN Henault the week of April 7.  In order to be 
available in Afghanistan in August, Canadian military 
equipment will need to set sail by the end of May.  Gilmour 
also noted that given sustainment challenges, Canada may need 
to re-assign three Hercules transport aircraft currently in 
Operation Enduring Freedom to ISAF.  We told her that 
Canadian Forces planners should discuss this possibility with 
U.S. military counterparts. 
CELLUCCI