This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM KDEM PINR GT
SUBJECT: RIOS MONTT CANDIDACY FACES FIRST LEGAL CHALLENGE 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The GOG's Registry of Citizens announced 
on June 6 its rejection of Efrain Rios Montt's presidential 
candidacy.  Rios Montt announced his intention to appeal the 
decision, a process involving several different institutions 
which could take months.  The deadline for candidates to be 
registered for the November 9 election is September 9.  On 
June 4, Congress appointed a new magistrate to the Supreme 
Electoral Tribunal, filling a vacancy which some argued could 
have clouded the legitimacy of the electoral process.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.   (U) On June 6, the Registry of Citizens turned down Rios 
Montt's request for a certificate that he meets all the 
qualifications established in the Constitution to be a 
candidate for President.  Obtaining this certificate is the 
first step for any candidate before they can register their 
candidacy with the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE).  The 
decision, based on Article 186(a) of the Constitution, which 
prohibits candidates who took office as a result of 
extra-constitutional means, was expected.  Rios Montt's 
request was based on the principle that the 1985 Constitution 
is not retroactive in its application to his de-facto 
presidency, from March 23, 1982 to August 8, 1983.  The 
Registry decision noted that Article 186(a) was written in 
the past tense, indicating retroactivity.  The Registry had 
previously rejected Rios Montt's eligibility to run for 
president in 1990 and 1995. 
 
Reaction to Registry Decision 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) While the political opposition and constitutional 
scholars applauded the Registry's ruling, Rios Montt said he 
will appeal.  On June 7 he told reporters that the Registry 
had exceeded its authority by making a legal interpretation 
of his qualifications.  President Portillo also supported 
Rios Montt's right to run, saying he knew of "no impediment" 
to his candidacy.  On the campaign trail in Western 
Guatemala, Rios Montt reportedly declared that "if they do 
not permit me to participate, they will violate my rights, 
the law is not retroactive and it will be the people who 
elevate me to the Presidency."  Asked if the FRG was 
considering a replacement candidate, he said "there is no 
substitute."  The FRG reportedly filed an appeal with the 
Registry after its decision on June 6.  Rios Montt drew a 
crowd of 20,000 supporters in Totonicapan on June 6, and 
continued to campaign over the June 7-8 weekend.  Civil 
society and some opposition party representatives hailed the 
Registry's decision as strengthening the rule of law in 
Guatemala. 
 
The Appeal Process 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  (U) The Registry's rejection of Rios Montt's candidacy 
can be appealed to the Department of Political Organizations 
of the Registry of Citizens within three days.  (Note: Press 
reported that the FRG sent documents to the Registry on June 
¶6.  End Note.)  The director of the Registry has 8 days to 
decide on the appeal.  If the Registry reaffirms its ruling, 
the FRG can appeal to the Supreme Electoral Tribunal.  The 
Tribunal's ruling, in turn, can be appealed to the Supreme 
Court's Court of Appeals.  Finally, the Supreme Court's 
ruling can be appealed to the Constitutional Court, 
constituted as the Extraordinary Tribunal of Injunction 
("Amparo," in Spanish). 
 
Congress Fills a Gap on the TSE 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) On June 4 Congress elected Sergio Mijangos to fill a 
vacancy on the TSE by 77 votes from the FRG and PAN. 
Mijangos was elected to serve as the replacement for a judge 
who never took office, creating a vacuum in the 5-member 
court.  Mijangos had served as Registrar of Property and 
Secretary General of the Public Ministry from 1994-96. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The decision by the Registry of Persons is  a 
significant, if expected, blow to Rios Montt's candidacy. 
The Registry's legal challenge is significant in that it 
forces Rios Montt (rather than his many opponents) to file 
the appeal.  The FRG leadership has vowed to pursue appeals 
at all levels to resolve the eligibility issue by September 
9, the deadline for inscription of candidates.  Politically, 
the Registry's ruling main significance is to show that at 
least one Guatemalan official institution does not believe 
that Rios Montt is constitutionally eligible to be a 
candidate. 
HAMILTON