This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 003774 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, AUGUST 14-17: KUWAITI FORCES 
FOR IRAQ; TERRORISM; ABU MAZEN VISIT; GUANTANAMO DETAINEES 
 
REF: KUWAIT 02545 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: One newspaper reports official denials that 
Kuwait will send peacekeeping forces to Iraq, contradicting 
a local press report of August 16 that Kuwait, Qatar and UAE 
would contribute forces to the coalition effort. One 
commentator believes that Arab unity is dead as a result of 
the war in Iraq, and that Gulf countries should "detach 
themselves from the old Arab system" and send forces to 
Iraq. 
 
Another disagrees with American Ambassador to Kuwait Richard 
¶H. Jones' comment in a local paper that Kuwait has gained a 
great deal from supporting Operation Iraqi Freedom, pointing 
to Kuwaiti "isolation" due to "world-wide opposition" to the 
war, and the "lack of promised security." 
 
While one writer agrees that the Arab world needs democracy 
and freedom, he blames US support for Israel for terrorism. 
Another sarcastically writes that the only cooperation Arabs 
can muster is in "spreading extremism and financing 
terrorism." Opinion on a Palestinian apology for support of 
Iraq's 1990 invasion before any visit by Palestinian Prime 
Minister Mahmoud Abbas remains divided. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: Following a meeting with Minister of 
Interior, the Chairman of the National Committee for the 
Kuwait Detainees at Guantanamo, Khaled Al-Ouda, reported 
that the Minister had asked Ambassador Jones to communicate 
to the American Administration the importance of either 
trying or releasing Kuwaiti detainees at Guantanamo, Al-Rai 
Al-Aam reports on its August 17 front page. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on its front page that the Ministry of 
Defense approved the naturalization of 400 bidoons 
(stateless residents of Kuwait) who work in the military and 
is considering the posthumous naturalization of several 
bidoon POWs. 
 
Al-Anba reports that a Kuwaiti military source has denied an 
August 16 report in Al-Seeyasah that Kuwait plans to send 
peacekeeping troops to Iraq. 
 
Al-Watan reports that the new Minister of Information, 
Mohammed Abul-Hasan, met with the editor-in-chief of Al- 
Watan, Mohammad Al-Jassim- who was referred to the Public 
Prosecutor in June on charges of "contesting the authority 
of the Amir" (reftel)- and received Al-Jassim's comments on 
the proposed press law that would give the government more 
power to . 
 
Al-Anba reports that a Ministry of Planning survey says that 
463,566 Kuwaiti women currently work, comprising 37.8% of 
the workforce. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Manufacturing Democracy" 
Adnan Al-Kazemi wrote in independent Al-Watan (8/17):  "I 
agree with what Dr. [Condoleeza] Rice. that lack of freedom 
is the cause for the low gross national product of the Arab 
world and that this region needs to develop by granting more 
freedom and democracy.  However, I do not agree with her 
that terrorism is caused by shortage of various resources. 
It is rather due to the existence of Israel and U.S. support 
for it. The best assistance that the West can offer the 
Arabs is to not intervene in Arabs' internal affairs and to 
keep their distance. They can only offer advice and 
technical assistance because Arabs need to solve their own 
problems." 
 
¶4.  "The Superstar of Terrorism" 
Salwa Al-Saeed wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (8/16): 
"Terrorism in Saudi Arabia is not exclusively Saudi-made. 
There are indications that Arabs and at least five Kuwaitis 
had a role in the attacks, which took place in Saudi Arabia 
in the past few months. As for Iraq, Arab extremists also 
had a role in the attacks against American forces. This 
proves the failure of Arabs to achieve any form of useful 
cooperation other than spreading extremism and financing 
terrorism. The best product of the Arab world is the export 
of terrorism." 
 
¶5.  "The Right Number in the Wrong Formula" 
Amena Al-Musawi wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (8/15): 
"[In an interview with Al-Qabas published on July 27] the US 
Ambassador to Kuwait expressed surprise that Kuwaitis would 
wonder what benefits they've gained from allowing the US to 
use Kuwait as a base to wage war on Iraq. He stated that 
Kuwait gained billions of dollars as a result of the 
presence of coalition forces, in addition to Kuwait's 
liberation from the dangers of Saddam. What the American 
Ambassador failed to mention is that. Kuwait has paid a dear 
price for supporting the Anglo-American war on Iraq since 
most countries world-wide rejected the war. Moreover, Kuwait 
has incurred environmental damage as a result of war on Iraq 
due to the presence of coalition forces. The American 
Ambassador also failed to mention that the security which 
the US has promised us is not a reality." 
 
¶6.  Thabet Al-Haroon wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(8/14):  "The American Administration has been busy trying 
to issue resolutions in Iraq unilaterally, without 
consulting the Iraqis. [and] have failed to benefit from the 
potential of the Iraqi opposition parties by not allowing 
them to contribute to the handling of affairs in their 
country." 
 
¶7.  "Welcome, Abu Mazen" 
Hassan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/14): "Why 
are we still holding the entire Palestinian people 
responsible for the mistakes of its former leadership? . Abu 
Mazen has repeatedly confirmed the illegitimacy of the Iraqi 
invasion and occupation of Kuwait, emphasizing the 
Palestinian people are suffering from a similar situation." 
 
¶8.  "You Are Not Welcome" 
Adel Al-Qassar wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/14):  "We 
praise the government's step to postpone the visit of Abu 
Mazen to Kuwait unless there is a clear apology from him 
[for Palestinian support of the 1990 Iraqi invasion of 
Kuwait]. Kuwait's dignity cannot bear their rudeness." 
 
¶9.  "Arabs Are The Enemies of Iraq" 
Abdelamir Al-Turki wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (8/17): 
"The role of the Gulf region has become vital after the 
collapse and the defeat of the Arab system at the hands of 
Israel and Iraq. The recognition by the UN Security Council 
of the Interim Governing Council and the Arab League's 
refusal to recognize it is clear proof that the old Arab 
system has died. Therefore, it is natural that the Gulf 
region detach itself from that vulnerable Arab system and 
take a leading role concerning Iraq by deciding to send Arab 
forces to maintain peace and security in Iraq." 
 
 
URBANCIC