This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 NASSAU 002124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL PINR PGOV BF CU UK
SUBJECT: BAHAMIAN DIPLOMATIC INITIATIVES TO CUBA AND CHINA 
 
Classified By: CHARGE R.M. WITAJEWSKI, FOR REASONS 1.5 B AND D 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶1.  (C)  Bahamian Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell is pursuing 
a new activist foreign policy focused around overtures to both Cuba 
and the People's Republic of China.  Both Havana and Beijing should 
be pleased.  Reportedly, The Bahamas will send a resident consul 
general to Havana and, in addition to moving the current Bahamian 
consulate from Hong Kong to Beijing, will permit the Chinese government 
to begin construction on a new embassy complex in Nassau. 
End Summary. 
 
 
CHINESE TO BUILD NEW EMBASSY COMPLEX IN NASSAU 
 
¶2.  (C)  Asked about his recent trip to China during a 
private lunch with Charge on October 20, Foreign Minister Fred Mitchell 
revealed that the Chinese will soon be granted permission to begin 
construction of a new embassy complex to be located on prime 
north-facing ocean-front property east of downtown Nassau.  (The 
proposed site is located on currently vacant land near the intersection 
of East Bay Street and Village Road.)  The approval in principle follow 
agreement that the PRC will send only "supervisors" to oversee the 
construction effort, rather than actual "workers."  Approval has been 
delayed for years over the issue of the composition of the construction 
work force, as well as questions about the size and architectural 
dominance of the proposed Chinese design. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  FM Mitchell did not indicate when the public announcement 
would be made about the construction go-ahead. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Asked again about his recent extensive trip to 
China, as he has since his return FM Mitchell remained closemouthed and 
uncommunicative.  He wondered  -- again -- why we were interested in hi 
and his cabinet colleagues' trip.  Refusing to be drawn out, all he 
would say about his trip was that he found "the Chinese to be incredibl 
industrious" and Beijing to be "gray and drab." When Charge rhetoricall 
wondered about the growing Chinese interest in The Bahamas, FM Mitchell 
replied laconically "economic."  Charge looked a bit incredulous, notin 
that some 85 percent of all Bahamian purchases were made in south 
Florida and, in any event, the entire country's 340,000 people did not 
represent much of a market to the Chinese.  FM Mitchell said that "the 
Chinese consider the billion dollar Hutcheson-Wampoa container port 
facility in Freeport as 'their's". " 
 
¶5. (C )  Responding to Charge_ observation that at least the 
Chinese embassy would not have the security setback problems facing 
the U.S. Embassy,  Mitchell joked that if the United States said that 
it too would build a new embassy, the Government would sell back at cos 
the 11 acre parcel long intended as the site of a new US Embassy 
compound that the USG sold to the Bahamian government several years ago 
 
WILL THE PRIME MINISTER TRAVEL TO PRC TOO? 
 
¶6. (C)  The British High Commissioner to The Bahamas believes 
that Prime Minister Perry Christie will still be making a trip to China 
in November. He called Charge October 21 to report that he found it 
strange that the trip had still not been announced.  While Christie_ 
plans, if any, remain secretive, other senior members of the Bahamian 
government have been extensive travelers to China of late.  In addition 
to FM Mitchell and Aviation Minister Hanna-Martin, Bahamas Agricultural 
and Industrial Corporation executive chairman (and reputed political 
bagman) Sidney Stubbs has also just led a delegation to China, 
presumably seeking expanded trade ties. 
Rumors of corruption and bribery continue to circle around Stubbs in 
Bahamian political circles.  One local newspaper has publicly raised 
questions about the financing of this $48,667.85 junket. 
 
 
BAHAMAS TO UPGRADE DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH CUBA 
 
¶7. (C)  Well-informed sources indicate that the Bahamian 
Government has come to an agreement with the Castro regime to establish 
a resident Bahamian diplomatic presence in Havana.  Reportedly, the 
Bahamians will send a diplomat with the rank of Consul General to 
Havana in the 2004-05 fiscal year when funding becomes available.  Whil 
The Cubans are represented in Nassau at the rank of Consul by Felix 
Wilson (formerly assigned to the Cuban Interests Section in Washington) 
up to now, the Bahamians have not had a resident presence in Havana. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Wilson held a press conference October 16 
denouncing the latest U.S. restrictions on travel to Cuba and announcin 
the annual Cuban attempt to have the bilateral trade embargo condemned 
at the UNGA.  FM Mitchell appears to have beenembarrassed by the 
publicity, chiding Wilson saying that the Bahamas has traditionally 
voted to lift the embargo at the UNGA, would do so again this 
year and didn_ need to be reminded of this. 
 
COMMENT 
 
¶9.  (C)  The openings to Beijing and Havana  -- which will 
entail considerable personnel expense for the Bahamians even if China 
and Cuba subsidize the actual operations of the Bahamian diplomatic 
missions in their countries -- come at a time of considerable budget 
constraint in The Bahamas.  The government that is delaying salary 
increases and promotions for civil servants, and cutting back on public 
works projects, apparently has decided that upgrading relations with 
Cuba and China are worth the expense.  Certain members of the Christie 
government support FM Mitchell's initiative out of either ideological 
sympathy, or pure balance of power political reasons. Mitchell is doing 
this for both reasons. 
 
WITAJEWSKI