This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 002711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - NOVEMBER 15, 2003 
 
REF: SECSTATE 299239 
 
Classified By: CTC AUSTIN G. GILREATH, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (S) Begin Summary:  The Charge convened an EAC meeting on 
November 15 to consider the impending extradition of Sheikh 
al-Moayad from Germany to the United States.  While the 
Embassy has seen no evidence of anti-US demonstrations or 
political activity in anticipation of the transfer, the EAC 
decided to issue a warden message providing background on the 
issue and advising increased personal vigilience on or about 
November 16 (i.e., after Moayed actually departs Germany 
enroute to the United States).  Key offices and personnel 
represented at the meeting included:  POL/ECON, CONS, RSO, 
MO, FPD, POL/MIL, DAO, OMC, and SOC YEMEN.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The Charge opened the meeting with an update on recent 
developments in the case of Sheikh al-Moayed in Germay, 
concluding that extradition was expected to be conducted on 
16 November.  The Charge cautioned that the Sheikh had many 
friends in Yemen who believe him to be an apolitical figure 
unjustly accused and duped by the US and Germany.  The Charge 
assessed that the delay resultant from protracted legal 
appeals in the case has probably worked to our advantage by 
allowing time for Yemeni public interest in the case to wane. 
 The RSO briefed that he has been in contact with his 
Ministry of Interior (MOI) interlocutors and that they 
reported an absence of any extradition-related political 
activity in the streets or the mosques. 
 
¶3. (C) POL/ECON briefed the EAC on her recent conversation 
with the German DCM regarding security issues related to the 
extradition.  Although it has no indications of impending 
trouble, the German Embassy in Sanaa has issued a travel 
warning and restricted the movement of embassy personnel as a 
safety precaution.  MOI has deployed extra security personnel 
at the German Embassy, employee residences and selected 
German civilian residences.  As of November 15, 2003, the 
German air carrier Lufthansa has suspended its flights into 
Sanaa International Airport.  This suspension of service was 
expected to last no less than one week. 
 
---------------- 
EAC Actions 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The EAC decided to issue a warden message in the near 
term (after Moayed actually leaves Germany enroute for the 
U.S.) to brief the facts of the case, point out that the 
Shaykh will be tried in a regular court and not a military 
tribunal, and advise increased personal vigilience.  Upcoming 
social events are to proceed as scheduled with necessary 
security measures in place for each.  The Public Diplomacy 
section is sponsoring an Iftar dinner on 19 November, but the 
EAC will monitor and evaluate the security situation and opt 
to cancel the dinner if warranted. 
MISENHEIMER