This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 004053 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, AUGUST 31-SEPTEMBER 1: 
MOSQUE BOMBING IN NAJAF; DEATH OF BAQER AL-HAKIM; TERRORISM; 
IRAQ 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: The Kuwait Ministry of Interior denies media 
reports of the arrest of two Kuwaitis in Iraq in connection 
with the August 29 bombing in Najaf that killed Shiaa cleric 
Mohammad Baqer Al-Hakim. While Al-Hakim's death is viewed as 
a great loss, one Shiaa writer feels Al-Hakim's "martyrdom" 
will rally Iraqis to unify, and hopes this attack will 
"speed up the process of handing over security to the Iraqi 
people." 
 
The series of bombings in Iraq over the last weeks leads one 
writer to fear that terrorists may seek to infiltrate Kuwait 
to carry out similar attacks. An Islamist commentator labels 
US involvement in Iraq a "failure" and states that 
coalitions forces are "oppressing the Iraqi people rather 
than helping them." END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: A Ministry of Interior official denies 
international media reports that two Kuwaitis have been 
arrested in Iraq in connection with the bombing outside a 
mosque in Najaf that killed Shiaa cleric Mohammad Baqer Al- 
Hakim. 
 
All newspapers report official condemnations of the Najaf 
bombing from the Council of Ministers (Cabinet), Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Sheikh Dr. Mohammad Al-Sabah and the Speaker 
of the National Assembly Jassim Al-Khorafi. Crown Prince 
Sheikh Saad is reported to have sent a condolence cable to 
the family of Mohammad Baqer Al-Hakim. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports on September 1 that a female member of 
the US military reportedly was sexual assaulted by an Arab 
expatriate on August 16. 
 
All newspapers report that a Ministry of Interior vehicle 
and a Saudi truck carrying an aid shipment were stolen from 
near the Kuwaiti border at gunpoint by Iraqis in military 
uniforms. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Terrorism is Among Us" 
Saud Al-Samaka wrote in independent Al-Qabas (9/01):  "Those 
who are behind the assassination of Baqer Al-Hakim were 
aiming at causing a civil war in Iraq after the end of 
Saddam's era. It is not enough to just issue statements of 
condemnations and to discuss combating terrorism after every 
attack carried out by Al-Qaeda organization. The source of 
terrorism today is among us. Terrorism was not grown in 
Afghanistan or Pakistan-- it was grown here in the Gulf 
region." 
 
¶4.  Shiite MP Abdul- Mohsen Yousef Jamal wrote in 
independent Al-Qabas (9/01):  "The death of Baqer Al-Hakim 
is a tremendous loss for Iraq. His death, however, will also 
be an important factor in strengthening Iraq's unity.  It 
will help Iraqis realize the importance of their unity and 
the importance of deciding on pending issues before things 
get out of control.  Al-Hakim's martyrdom will expedite the 
birth of a new Iraq according to his vision and one that the 
Interim Governing Council had adopted and the majority of 
the Iraqi people will approve. His martyrdom is a strong 
blow to Saddam's cronies who are corrupting this earth. His 
martyrdom will also be a strong deterrent to the forces of 
occupation so they may speed up the process of handing over 
security to the Iraqi people and to help establish their 
forces and institutions in order to prevent the situation 
from deteriorating." 
 
¶5.  "Who Will Save Iraq?" 
Liberal Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah 
(8/31):  "It seems that the situation in Iraq will 
deteriorate more especially after the assassination of 
[Baqer] Al-Hakim. This makes it uncertain if it is possible 
to achieve peace without the foreign presence in Iraq. The 
problems in Iraq today are not due to internal disputes 
among the parties, but because these parties and sects have 
adopted the language of terrorism and violence, instead of 
adopting the language of dialogue and tolerance. We, as 
Arabs, must demand that coalition forces remain in Iraq 
until it is stable and a new constitution is written. We do 
not want another Somalia or Afghanistan near us." 
 
¶6.  Islamist Dr. Wael Al-Hasawi wrote in independent Al-Rai 
Al-Aam (8/28):  "It is clear that the Americans have failed 
to manage Iraqi affairs. The situation in Iraq is steadily 
deteriorating and Iraqis are now wondering about the 
intentions of the Americans in Iraq. They are increasing the 
suffering of Iraqis by oppressing them instead of working on 
solving their problems." 
 
¶7.  "The Dilemma of the Son" 
Bader Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (8/31): 
"Americans found out that the Bush Administration has 
deceived them by claiming that Iraq posses WMD and that Iraq 
is a threat to US security and to the world. George Bush 
will not win the next election despite what he did for the 
Jewish State and for the Jews. His orders to freeze Hamas' 
assets and the pressure he applies on the Palestinians will 
not do him any good. He will not get the votes of the Jewish 
community or of the American right wing extremists who are 
manipulated by the Zionists. The next stage requires a 
popular American leader that has to be smarter." 
 
¶8.  Saleh Al-Shayiji wrote in independent Al-Anba (8/31): 
"Those who believe that bin Laden or Arafat or Qadafi are 
the only Arab terrorists are mistaken. The Arab mentality 
and those who believe in it are also terrorists because they 
are incapable of developing and adapting to life. The Arab 
mentality totally ignores others: it is hostile to the East 
and the West." 
 
¶9.  "Terrorism is on the Way" 
Hassan Al-Sayegh wrote in independent Al-Anba (9/01): 
"Saudi Arabia was exposed to a number of terrorist attacks 
carried out by Al-Qaeda. The Jordanian Embassy and the UN 
headquarters in Baghdad were also attacked and caused the 
death of many people. In light of the above, I do not rule 
out the possibility that some terrorists will infiltrate 
into Kuwait to carry out attacks on Kuwaiti soil in order to 
weaken and disturb the stability and security of Kuwait." 
 
URBANCIC