This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LAGOS 000025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SECSTATE FOR ECA/A/E/AF (EBerelson, WBell, AMartin) 
INFO AF/PD (AAmirthanayagam); Abuja for CPAO, CAO, CAS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SCUL NI
SUBJECT:  FULBRIGHT ALUMNI ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIA 
SUCCESSFULLY INAUGURATES BOARD OF TRUSTEES AT THIRD 
          ANNUAL CONFERENCE 
 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: The 3rd annual conference of the 
Fulbright Alumni Association of Nigeria (FAAN) was held 
from November 25-28 at Nsukka, home of the first 
indigenous Nigerian university. The three-day program 
with the theme "Globalization and Development In 
Nigeria" included addresses by the CPAO and a current 
U.S. senior Fulbright scholar; a message read from DAS- 
Academic Programs Thomas A. Farrell; and the 
inauguration of the newly-formed Board of Trustees, an 
innovative idea to enhance interest and planning 
activities of FAAN.  After a relatively unsuccessful 
2001 conference, FAAN proved to PAS this year that it 
was capable of organizing a productive conference, and 
PAS was proud to have sponsored this year's successful 
event. 
 
 
¶2.  DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY: The conference began with 
a PAS courtesy call on the Chairman of the conference 
and host Vice-Chancellor, former Fulbright Professor 
Ginigeme Mbanefoh who also delivered the welcome 
address that preceded an inspiring keynote address by 
Professor Elizabeth U. Anyakoha, a renowned UNN 
lecturer on vocational education.  The CPAO read a 
congratulatory message from DAS-Academic Programs 
Thomas A. Farrell and delivered remarks on finding 
one's niche in a globalized world. Duly registered as a 
corporate body, a Board of Trustees for FAAN was 
inaugurated as part of the opening ceremonies.  The new 
FAAN Board is composed of many of Nigeria's world class 
scholars, including the first and only female Vice 
Chancellor as well as several other VCs. Papers on sub- 
themes related to the central theme of `Globalization 
and Development in Nigeria' were presented, discussed 
and defended. There was a consensus that liberal 
democratization is an essential ingredient, as well as 
national security, good governance, and observance of 
the rule of law, for globalization and development in 
Nigeria. Finally, a new National Executive Board was 
elected for a two-year term, and it was decided to hold 
the 2003 conference at the Nigerian Institute of Policy 
and Strategic Studies (NIPSS), a prominent public think- 
tank in Jos. 
 
 
The presence of Dr. Jean Borgatti, current U.S. 
Fulbright senior scholar of Art History at the 
University of Benin, gave a fresh and aesthetic insight 
into the topics at hand.  She also suggested creating a 
FAAN website on which all the papers could be placed 
for other Fulbrighters and the general public to read, 
and she offered to help create the web-site for the 
Association. 
 
 
Another new development was the decision to publish a 
journal of all papers presented at the conference. 
Many far-reaching innovations and recommendations were 
brought up in the course of the Annual General Meeting 
(AGM) on the second day of the conference, such as the 
introduction of the Fulbright conference journal to the 
GON through the Federal Ministry of Education. At the 
end of the conference, a communiqu was issued to all 
participants about the highlights of the discussions, 
and this communiqu will be forwarded to Education 
committees in government circles as well as all Vice- 
Chancellors of Nigerian universities.  FAAN hopes to 
eventually become self-funded and be an important voice 
in government decision-making processes in the 
educational sector. 
 
 
 
 
¶3.   BACKGROUND: FAAN is one of Nigeria's newest 
academic associations though the large Nigerian 
Fulbright academic exchange program dates back to the 
early 1970s. Inaugurated in 2000, the Association is 
now fully registered with the Corporate Affairs 
s 
Commission as a corporate body with a Constitution and 
a National Executive Council (NEC).  Although FAAN had 
a rocky start, enthusiasm of the National Executive is 
high, and this year's conference has been a positive 
force for reinvigorating the organization. 
In his presidential address, Professor G. M. Babatunde, 
outgoing FAAN President and new FAAN Board member, 
praised the timeliness of the conference theme and 
encouraged members to consider how to make FAAN 
relevant to the Nigerian university system and an 
audible voice in government policy-making. 
 
 
¶4. Result/Impact: Excellent.  The selection of the 
theme "Globalization and Development in Nigeria" was 
timely, relevant, and thought-provoking. It will form 
the basis for much of FAAN's future planning and 
activities. 
 
 
¶5. Date: November 25-28, 2002  FY 2003, First Quarter 
 
 
¶6. MPP Umbrella Theme: Strengthening Economic Growth 
 
 
¶7. Audience Reached: Despite being held during Ramadan, 
70 Fulbright alumni and participants from as far as 
Bayero University in Kano State attended.  Others, 
university students, Trustees of the Board and other 
guest participants who are interested in the Fulbright 
program, were greatly influenced by the extensive 
deliberations by academics and researchers, Vice- 
Chancellors, Deputy Vice-Chancellors, Deans and 
lecturers alike who were at the conference.  The 
Fulbright scholars will incorporate the knowledge 
gained from these papers in their lectures to varying 
student populations in their respective institutions. 
 
 
The FAAN National Executive has also commenced plans to 
publish a journal of all papers presented at the 3rd 
annual conference for future reference purposes at 
universities throughout the country.  In addition, the 
conference attracted a total of twenty new subscribers 
to the Embassy's Crossroads newsletter.  A full report 
of the FAAN conference will be published in the next 
edition of the Crossroads, providing information on 
FAAN to the 6,000 subscribers. Finally, the planned 
FAAN web-site will facilitate communication and unity 
among Fulbright alumni across the nation. 
 
 
¶8. Non-USG Funding: FAAN had a total sum of over Naira 
400,000.00 (approximately USD 3,000.00) in its bank 
account, which was used to commence planning activities 
for this year's conference.  The money represented 
annual dues paid by alumni over the past two years as 
well as minor cash donations. 
 
 
¶9. Quality of U.S. Support: Excellent.  FAAN is 
especially grateful to ECA/A/E/AF for securing the 
DAS's special message, which clearly touched the 
participants. PAS would also appreciate receiving 
information on alternate sources of funding to augment 
PAS funds. 
HINSON-JONES