This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000916 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL GT
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT RECEIVES LIMITED PRESS COVERAGE 
 
REF: A. GUATEMALA 705 
 
     ¶B. GUATEMALA 683 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Upon public release of the 2002 Human Rights 
Report (HRR) on March 31, Embassy issued a press statement 
from the Ambassador highlighting the USG human rights 
concerns in Guatemala and areas where we believe improvements 
can made.  However, neither the report nor the Ambassador's 
statement received much public attention, as the recurring 
theme of the human rights situation was overshadowed by the 
war in Iraq and breaking political scandals.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Ambassador's statement reiterated USG concern over 
the human rights situation and expressed hope for improvement 
with the creation of CICIACS (Ref A).  Only one daily 
newspaper, Prensa Libre, reported the release of the HRR and 
the Ambassador's statement.  No radio programs covered the 
report's release.  All press attention focused on the war in 
Iraq and the latest Guatemalan scandal, that of the duel 
between Attorney General Carlos de Leon and former 
Anti-Corruption Prosecutor, Karen Fischer. (Ref B) 
 
¶3. (U) Immediately after the public release in Washington, 
HROff and PolOff delivered a copy of the report to Sara 
Solis, Director of Bilateral Affairs, and Mario Cifuentes, 
Senior Assistant to the Minister, at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.  HROff also circulated the report amongst human 
rights contacts.  All recipients thanked HROff for the 
detailed report and said they anxiously await translation, 
which post expects to have completed with the next two weeks. 
 
¶4. (U) Comment: Domestic scandals in an election year and a 
controversial foreign war crowded out news of the HRR's 
release this year.  In addition, USG concern over the human 
rights situation here in Guatemala is common knowledge, and 
thus not particularly newsworthy.  Once we have a Spanish 
translation, we will consider new PD opportunities to advance 
our human rights agenda.  At a meeting April 3, however, 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez said he had read the report in its 
entirety.  He appeared to find it balanced and objective. 
HAMILTON