This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ROME 003827 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/21/2013 
TAGS: PREL EAID AF IT USNC
SUBJECT: FUNDING FOR AFGHAN ELECTIONS:  ITALY WILL HELP, 
PROBABLY THROUGH EU -- BUT DON'T FORGET IMPACT OF SECURITY 
 
REF: A. STATE 237880 
     ¶B. ROME 3794 
     ¶C. ROME 3366 
     ¶D. ROME 1434 
 
Classified By: CHARGE EMIL SKODON, REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  Italy will help us seek needed funding for 
Afghanistan, but funds will likely to have to come from EU 
coffers.  While the Italians have not flatly ruled out 
increased bilateral assistance, our contacts think this is 
unlikely, given Italy's ongoing financial commitments, 
including to Afghanistan.  Our counterparts recommend we 
consider approaching key EU members and perhaps the EC 
directly prior to Afghanistan-related meetings in early 
September.  They also let us know that U/S for Asia and Human 
Rights Boniver will lead an EU Troika visit to Afghanistan in 
October, which European Commissioner Chris Patten is expected 
to join.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  A/PolMin raised Ref A points with Acting MFA 
Political Director Bisogniero on August 19.  Charge 
reiterated the points to the acting Diplomatic Adviser to the 
Prime Minister, Francesco Talo', on August 20 (see also Ref 
B).  Poloff discussed the points with the Chief of Staff to 
the Under Secretary for Asia and Human Rights on August 21 
and the Special Coordinator for Afghanistan on August 20.  We 
have also shared the points with available contacts in the 
MFA's offices of EU Affairs and Development and Cooperation. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Our Italian counterparts have not told us Italy will 
not increase its bilateral assistance to Afghanistan (over 47 
million Euro pledged, Ref D).  However, speaking openly and 
without instructions to Poloff, Special Coordinator for 
Afghanistan Ambassador Enrico di Maio (please protect 
throughout) said finding additional bilateral money was 
highly unlikely, given Italy's budget problems and current 
level of international assistance, not only in Afghanistan, 
but also in Iraq and other parts of the world.  Those of us 
who work on Afghanistan see the urgency, he said.  The need 
for action as outlined by the U.S. is "crystal clear;" USG 
arguments are well-founded.  "I applaud the USG's leadership. 
 But it is a question of money."  U/S Boniver's Chief of 
Staff, Minister Alessandro Di Franco, was less direct, but 
made much the same point.  (See also Ref C, describing 
current levels of expenditures and the negotiations needed to 
come up with funding for assistance and peacekeeping.) 
 
¶4.  (C)  Di Maio (echoed in part by PM Diplomatic Adviser 
Talo' in his meeting with the Charge, Ref B) urged the USG to 
also push Germany and the UK to support our proposal.  As the 
other lead nations building and stabilizing Afghanistan, they 
would be predisposed to support us and could help Italy make 
the case to the EU.  Di Maio characterized the FRG as 
"particularly engaged."  The U.S. should also approach the 
Commission directly; "the Commission has the money."  Di Maio 
said the Netherlands were also quite strong on Afghan 
assistance.  Asked if Italy would also push, as current 
holder of the EU Presidency, Di Maio said he had already been 
in touch with his counterparts at the Commission.  But it 
would take more than Italy acting alone, he suggested.  He 
noted the difficulty of the Presidency country pushing others 
if it was not able to lead by example. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Still speaking frankly, Di Maio emphasized the 
"vicious circle" between aid contributions and the security 
situation in Afghanistan.  NATO leadership of ISAF is a great 
help, but expansion of ISAF beyond Kabul would facilitate 
larger donations.  Di Maio asserted that the EU wants to see 
ISAF expansion.  Even if the decision to expand ISAF's role 
is made, it will take time to implement.  Meanwhile, some 
governments (or, he implied, the EC) could use the security 
situation as an excuse for delaying funding increases and/or 
disbursement.  Waiting one year for expansion of ISAF's role 
would be too long, Di Maio insisted.  The urgency -- as laid 
out in the U.S. points -- is now.  There is a contradiction 
between pushing for accelerated development on the one hand, 
and delaying security considerations on the other. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Di Maio and Chief of Staff Di Franco highlighted 
upcoming meetings conducive to EU consideration of increased 
funding for Afghanistan.  According to them, there will be a 
meeting of development experts in Brussels on September 8, on 
Asian Affairs on September 11, and on Political Affairs on 
September 12.  (Di Maio is scheduled to attend the last 
meeting.)  Both highlighted an October visit by the EU Troika 
to Afghanistan.  (They did not provide an exact date.)  U/S 
for Asia and Human Rights Boniver will lead the visit, 
 
 
according to Di Franco, and both said EC Commissioner Chris 
Patten was supposed to participate.  Di Maio believed the 
September 8 development meeting was key and urged full 
pressure prior to that meeting.  NOTE:  We checked the EU 
calendar and saw no meetings yet posted which appear to 
correspond directly to the ones mentioned.  USEU also checked 
to no avail.  We will seek further clarification.  END NOTE. 
 
¶7.  (C)  COMMENT:  We think the Italians who work directly on 
Afghanistan genuinely understand and agree with us on the 
need for urgent action.  Finding additional money for 
increased Italian bilateral assistance will be very 
difficult.  EU funding may be easier to achieve.  The 
Italians will work with us in EU fora, but we doubt that 
Italy will be able to carry this issue alone.  We would 
encourage strong approaches to the EC directly, as well as 
interventions seeking British and German support. 
Skodon 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME03827 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL