This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006340 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON JORDAN'S EXPORTS TO U.S., 
IRAQ 
 
                        Summary 
 
A lead story in all papers today, October 2, focuses 
on King Abdullah's talks with French President Chirac 
on Iraq and peace in the region. Another story in all 
papers highlights Foreign Minister Muasher's interview 
to Kuwaiti Newspaper Al-Rai Al-`Aam, in which he said 
that Jordan is not ready under any circumstance to 
receive ousted Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, denying 
any mediation on the part of the United States. All 
papers also report that Jordan has rejected Israel's 
request to use the Port of Aqaba to receive goods 
coming to Israel after a labor strike at the three 
Israeli sea ports. Stories also highlight developments 
in Iraq, citing an AFP report that Washington welcomed 
Jordan's willingness to train Iraqi army and police. 
 
   Editorial Commentary on Secretary Powell's Speech 
 
-- "Jordan's Exports to the United States" 
 
After wondering why the Qualifying Industrial Zones 
(QIZs) in Jordan have succeeded while the Free Trade 
Agreement has failed so far, daily columnist Fahd 
Fanek writes on the back page of semi-official, 
influential Arabic daily Al-Rai (10/02): "In order to 
explain this phenomenon and answer those questions, we 
must notice that most of the industries that were set 
up in the QIZs were basically set up for the U.S. 
Market and therefore, they comply with U.S. standards 
and have guaranteed markets. . . Jordan is also 
relatively distinguished in its garments industry 
because it has a surplus of labor. If we take a look 
at the cheap Jordanian labor, the clothes manufactured 
in Jordan can compete strongly." Fanek adds: "Most 
companies that operate at the QIZs are run by 
experienced foreign managers and investors, who enjoy 
high technical and marketing expertise. This is 
contrary to normal Jordanian industries that were 
developed under the protection of customs, which has 
led to high costs and low quality, in which these 
industries are being run by sons who have inherited 
the management from their fathers based on ownership 
rather than qualifications." 
 
Fanek concludes: "The success of the QIZs is 
understandable and deserves to be welcomed. 
Meanwhile, the failure of the Jordanian industry in 
taking advantage of the FTA is regrettable and 
requires early treatment to identify the reasons and 
diagnose the problem to start tackling it." 
 
-- "Taysir Allouni in the FBI Report" 
 
Commenting on the FBI's report on journalist Taysir 
Allouni, daily columnist Yasser Za'atreh writes on the 
op-ed page of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al- 
Dustour (10/02): "By pursuing Allouni, the United 
States wanted to a send out a threat to every Arab 
voice which seeks to cover Arab issues that have a 
positive impact on the Arab and Islamic streets. There 
is no doubt that the threat made by the U.S.-appointed 
governing council in Iraq to both Al-Jazirah and Al- 
Arabiyyah satellite channels confirms this. Besides, 
has Al-Jazirah committed a crime when it broadcasted a 
tape of Saddam white it is normal for foreign, 
including U.S., channels to do so? 
 
-- "The Iraqi Antidote and the "Required" Arab 
Silence" 
 
Daily columnist Urayb Rintawi, who writes on the op-ed 
page of center-left, influential Arabic daily Al- 
Dustour(10/02), maintained that Arabs have diverted 
attention to Iraq, after Palestine, and want to resist 
occupation "to the last Iraqi" after it was "to the 
last Palestinian." He notes that Arab satellite 
stations highlight resistance and struggle, but do not 
mention the positive side of the formation of 
political parties, over 100 newspapers and 
publications, comparative calm and quiet in most 
areas, awareness and some government services, and 
constructive dialogue, in addition to an Interim 
Council that is more democratic and representative 
than most Arab governments. 
 
In conclusion, Rintawi says: "Those who have been used 
to the antidote from Iraq, have nothing to offer to 
the Iraqis except urging them to become martyrs and, 
at the same time, wishing them a long life. These 
people are better off keeping silent, than uttering 
poison every time they talk about Iraq and the 
Iraqis." GNEHM