This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 001726 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, PRM/ANE 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/05/2013 
TAGS: PREF BH NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: BHUTANESE REPATRIATION DELAYED AT LEAST 
UNTIL DECEMBER 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  UNHCR Country Director Abraham Abraham 
reported that the Nepal-Bhutan 15th Joint Ministerial has 
again been delayed and that the earliest the Bhutanese 
refugees could be repatriated is early December.  The 
Government of Nepal and Royal Government of Bhutan have 
announced that they will meet on the sidelines of the U.N. 
General Assembly to discuss the refugee issue.  UNHCR and WFP 
representatives are also concerned over the lack of funding 
for secondary education in the camps.  Thousands of idle 
youths could provide fertile ground for recruiting efforts by 
the Maoists or other insurgent groups.  Post requests that 
the Department consider approaching the RGOB at the UNGA to 
discuss the refugee issue as well as consider funding for 
secondary education programs in the refugee camps.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) On September 3, Ambassador Malinowski met with UNHCR 
Country Director Abraham Abraham to discuss the Bhutanese 
refugee situation.  Abraham reported that both the Government 
of Nepal and the Royal Government of Bhutan mutually agreed 
to delay the 15th Joint Ministerial and to meet on the 
sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly meeting in New York to 
discuss the issue.  Abraham confided that, therefore, the 
earliest the two sides could possible move forward is early 
October.  At least six weeks would be necessary to distribute 
and collect repatriation documents from the refugees.  The 
earliest movement of the refugees to Bhutan, therefore, would 
be December 2003, he said.  Abraham expressed concern that 
the winter months would increase the difficulty of resettling 
refugees in a humane manner. 
 
¶3. (SBU) On September 5, the World Food Program and UNHCR 
presented to donor government representatives the results of 
the Joint Assessment Mission conducted from August 25 until 
September 5.  The assessment team's report (faxed to SA/INS) 
includes several recommendations, some of which are 
highlighted below: 
 
-- Strengthen advocacy efforts to raise awareness within 
Nepali communities as to why the refugees are in Nepal and 
the economic benefits of the refugees' presence to the local 
communities; 
 
-- Conduct a general headcount and record reconciliation 
exercise in order to verify figures and provide control over 
food distribution.  WFP and UNHCR expect that the new 
headcount would show that approximately 95,000 refugees 
remain in the camps, as many have departed to find job 
opportunities elsewhere; 
 
-- The GON and RGOB should hold the 15th Joint Ministerial as 
soon as possible, the results of which should be made 
publicly available shortly thereafter; 
 
-- The GON and RGOB Joint Verification Team should conduct 
the verification exercise for the remaining six camps 
simultaneously; 
 
-- Establish an informal task force with representatives from 
the GON, WFP and UNHCR to discuss and plan for durable 
solution options; 
 
¶4. (SBU) The WFP and UNHCR team also expressed concern over 
the lack of funding for secondary education (Grades 9-12) in 
the Bhutanese refugee camps.  UNHCR does not have the mandate 
to provide secondary-level education, which is currently 
funded through various donors to CARITAS in Nepal.  However, 
CARITAS is facing a significant funding short-fall whereby 
over 8,000 young adults will not be able to attend school 
this year. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment and Action Request.  Further delay of the 15th 
Joint Ministerial, along with other factors, has led Post to 
question the RGOB's commitment to repatriating a significant 
number of refugees to Bhutan.  Lack of transparency in the 
verification process, the categorization of over 70 percent 
of Khundunabari Camp refugees in Category II (those who must 
reapply for citizenship), reports from Bhutan that the RGOB 
continues to seize land held by the refugees, and recent 
statements made by the Druk National Assembly opposing any 
repatriation whatsoever have sent strong signals to the 
refugees that they are not wanted in Bhutan.  Therefore, Post 
requests that the Department approach the RGOB delegation at 
the UNGA to discuss the Bhutanese refugee issue and press 
them to allow for third party monitoring in Bhutan and to 
move forward with repatriation as soon as possible. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment and Action Request Continued:  Post is 
concerned that the large numbers of idle youth in the refugee 
camps will make fertile ground for recruitment efforts by the 
Maoists or other insurgent groups.  Post requests that the 
Department consider providing CARITAS with resources to 
continue its educational programs in the camps.  End Comment 
and Action Request. 
MALINOWSKI