This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 AMMAN 007507 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2013 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM PHUM JO
SUBJECT: NEW JORDANIAN PM REACHES OUT TO PARLIAMENT, 
ISLAMISTS, CIVIL SOCIETY AND THE PRESS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Since his designation as Prime Minister on October 
22, Faisal al-Fayez has undertaken an ambitious campaign to 
reach out to diverse segments of Jordanian society that have 
received little attention from past PMs.  In addition to 
meeting with parliamentary blocs, Fayez has engaged in formal 
dialogue with Islamist leaders, civil society organizations 
(including professional associations), and the press. 
Embassy sources generally give Fayez high marks for his 
outreach efforts, his willingness to listen, and his promises 
of public involvement in setting government policy.  Yet 
Fayez has yet to reveal any specific plans for his 
government, speaking only of general principles and goals, 
and there is still skepticism about whether this government 
will truly be different from its predecessors.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
PARLIAMENT AS A TRUE PARTNER? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Soon after the formation of his cabinet, Prime 
Minister Faisal al-Fayez pledged publicly that his government 
would engage all sectors of Jordanian society in a strong 
push for political and economic development.  In an interview 
October 31, Fayez stated, "My government seeks an open 
dialogue, and we believe in the importance of continuous and 
active dialogue with all political sectors, parties and civil 
society institutions."  Reflecting this sentiment, Fayez's 
schedule the last few weeks has been filled with meetings 
with politicians, religious leaders, media representatives, 
and NGOs.  He also formed a seven-member ministerial 
committee to follow up on the national dialogue campaign for 
political development which includes the ministers of 
political development, foreign affairs, interior, education, 
higher education, labor and Islamic affairs. 
 
¶3.  (U) One of Fayez's main targets for dialogue is 
Parliament.  During a recent public interview, he noted that 
the relationship between the government and Parliament "will 
be one of close cooperation and constant coordination," and 
stated that it was the duty of Parliament to monitor the 
government's performance.  To help foster close ties with 
Parliament, Fayez announced that he would meet with all 
parliamentary blocs to brief them on his government's goals 
and to listen to their concerns. 
 
¶4.  (C) Fayez, accompanied by Minister for Political 
Development Mohammad Daoudiyeh, first met November 2 with the 
National Reformist bloc (the largest of the parliamentary 
groupings).  According to MP Dr. Audeh Quawas (Christian - 
Amman, 3rd  District), Fayez appeared serious about listening 
to their concerns, devoting more than two hours to 
discussions and actively soliciting comments.  Fayez did not, 
however, present any kind of specific plan or strategy on 
behalf of the government, and Daoudiyeh was virtually silent 
throughout the meeting. 
 
¶5.  (C) Embassy sources indicate that Fayez's meetings with 
other parliamentary blocs proceeded along similar lines. 
During a November 3 discussion with the "National Action 
Front" bloc, for example, Fayez listened carefully to the 
deputies and spoke of the need for a modern and democratic 
electoral law, but did not suggest how the government might 
revise the law.  Likewise, while meeting members of the 
"National Parliamentary" bloc November 12, Fayez said that 
the government was committed to transparency in performance 
and the guarantee of equal opportunities for all Jordanians, 
but did not indicate how the government would work towards 
accomplishing these goals. 
 
--------------------------------- 
AN OLIVE BRANCH FOR THE ISLAMISTS 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Another of Fayez's first moves as Prime Minister was 
to visit the "Controller General" of the Muslim Brotherhood, 
Abul Majed Dhneibat, said to be the first courtesy call of 
its kind for a prime minister to a senior Muslim Brotherhood 
(MB) leader.  Reportedly instructed by King Abdullah to 
engage Islamists, Fayez described the MB in an interview 
November 15 as "an important party that we respect and will 
work with to enhance the process of political development." 
 
¶7.  (C) Fayez met November 5 with the 17-member Islamic 
Action Front (IAF) parliamentary bloc, the political wing of 
the MB.  According to press reports, Fayez spoke with his 
audience in mind, emphasizing the need for a democratic 
electoral law stemming from Islamic principles and pledging 
strong support for a Palestinian state.  At the same time, 
however, he said the government had to respect its treaties 
with other countries and its obligations towards the 
international community.  IAF deputy Dr. Tayseer al-Fetiani 
(West Banker, Amman - 2nd District) told PolCouns and PolOff 
November 16 that the meeting had gone well and that the IAF 
hoped for "good" relations with the government, stating that 
it was only "natural" for there to be an opposition party in 
Parliament.  But while Fetiani reported that Fayez seemed to 
genuinely listen to their views, he expressed doubt whether 
the new government would translate its positive rhetoric 
toward the IAF into concrete policies that allowed Islamists 
a greater voice or impact on policy. 
 
¶8.  (U) Another IAF deputy, Ali Abul Sukkar (Zarqa - 2nd 
District) told the press that the meeting with Fayez 
"definitely signals a new era of ties between the government 
and the Islamic movement."  He cautioned, however, that "one 
cannot really comment on anything now until after the new 
cabinet starts its mission and tangible results can be felt." 
 
---------------------- 
ENGAGING CIVIL SOCIETY 
---------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) Fayez has additionally reached out to civil society 
organizations ranging from the Jordan Federation for Labor 
Unions to the Jordan Artists Association.  He has moreover 
made a point to meet with women's groups including the 
Jordanian National Commission for Women and the General 
Federation for Jordanian Women. 
 
¶10.  (C) In a more controversial move, Fayez met November 10 
with members and the presidents of Jordan's 14 professional 
associations.  These associations had previously formed a 
centralized Professional Associations Council (PAC) that was 
declared illegal by a court of cassation in November 2002 for 
its political activities dominated by an anti-normalization 
agenda.  According to media reports, Fayez stated that he had 
no preconceived notions about the 14 associations and 
recognized that they were important national institutions 
that play a major role in the country's political development 
process. 
 
-------------------------- 
LET'S NOT FORGET THE PRESS 
-------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) Fayez's expansive outreach program also included the 
press.  On November 4, Fayez visited with members of the 
Higher Media Council (HMC) and officials of the Jordan Press 
Association (JPA).  In a public statement, JPA President 
Tareq Momani described the meeting as "frank, positive and 
constructive."  Momani said that Fayez promised "tangible 
changes" to current legislation so as to provide greater 
press freedom.  Although noting that such promises had been 
made by previous governments, Momani said "this time it could 
be different, because this prime minister is in tune with 
King Abdullah's determination to move things forward." 
 
¶12.  (U) Fayez continued his dialogue with the press November 
15 by calling on the country's four major daily newspapers, 
meeting editors, reporters and columnists.  During his 
visits, Fayez said that improving the performance of local 
media was a government priority and that political 
development required "a free and constructive media capable 
of carrying citizens' concerns."  Fayez also stated that "the 
media has the right to criticize the government, but such 
criticism should be directed towards government programs and 
performance and not personally against government officials." 
 
 
¶13.  (U) Similarly, in a November 16 meeting with the chief 
editors of 17 weekly newspapers, Fayez stated that the 
government would not interfere in the work of the press and 
media, but warned that any misuse of authority to criticize 
or harm individuals, rather than discuss policies, would be 
handled by the judiciary.  Fayez also called on the press to 
exercise objectivity and accuracy in their reporting, urging 
the editors to verify information before going to print. 
Following the meeting, Jihad Momani, chief editor of the 
Shihan weekly (and newly appointed senator, septel), said 
that Fayez promised amendments to the current Press and 
Publications Law to ensure greater press freedoms and prevent 
the detention of journalists over press violations. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶14.  (C) Fayez's outreach has touched groups -- like the  IAF 
and the professional associations -- that have received 
little positive attention from recent prime ministers. 
Embassy interlocutors appear genuinely pleased with Fayez's 
outreach campaign and his willingness to listen to their 
concerns.  But at the same time, many remain skeptical 
whether the government will actually incorporate their ideas 
and suggestions into its still-unpublished plan of action. 
Fayez could find further "dialogue" much more difficult when 
he has to debate the merits of proposed legislation or 
specific programs, rather than discuss general goals and lend 
a sympathetic ear. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman or access the site 
through the State Department's SIPRNET home page. 
GNEHM