This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000338 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL PARM IZ AL YM
SUBJECT: YEMENI FOREIGN MINISTER ON IRAQ AND THE ARAB 
LEAGUE MINISTERIAL IN CAIRO 
 
 
Classified By: Acting Pol/Econ Chief Catherine J. Westley for Reason 1. 
5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  The Iraq situation and the recent Arab 
League ministerial were discussed when the Ambassador called 
on Foreign Minister Qirbi on February 18.  Notably, according 
to Qirbi the Yemenis and other Arab countries did not buy 
into the French proposals on inspections, despite their 
appreciation for the French and German stances against 
military action.  Yemen's missile cooperation with North 
Korea and other matters were also discussed during the 
meeting (septels).  Also present at the meeting were MFA 
Advisor al-Iryani, DCM, DATT and Acting Pol/Econ Chief 
(notetaker).  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)   While giving the Foreign Minister a readout of his 
recent Washington consultations, the Ambassador said that 
there is total commitment on the part of the USG that Iraq 
must disarm.  He also noted that there is a preference for 
working through the UNSC and the international community, but 
that at the end of the day Iraq must disarm. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Qirbi gave a readout of the recent Cairo meeting of 
Arab League foreign ministers.  He said that they heard from 
the Saudis, the Syrians, the Iraqis, and that there is 
"nothing new" as far as the sequence of events is concerned. 
He said that the "striking issue" was the degree of Iraqi 
cooperation and its stated commitment to answer questions 
from the inspectors and eliminate WMD.  Qirbi opined that 
what Iraq said may or may not be correct, but if it is 
correct, they are moving in the right direction. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Qirbi said that the Arab delegations urged Iraq to 
"abide by and implement" UNSCR 1441 in its entirety.  He 
noted that there was unanimous opposition to military action 
unless all peaceful means of resolving the problem are 
exhausted.  He said that until there is a clear statement 
from the inspectors that Iraq is not cooperating, those 
peaceful means remain open.  However, he mentioned the 
possibility that time limits might be imposed. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Qirbi said the French and German positions against 
military action were appreciated, but that the ROYG and most 
Arab states do not/not agree with their proposals regarding 
inspectors.  He suggested that the Arab delegations are 
mindful of not taking advantage of the split between the 
French and German governments and the U.S. and other European 
governments.  Rather, the Arab position would be to pressure 
Iraq toward an outcome acceptable to both France and the 
U.S., meaning both no war and complete disarmament. 
 
¶6.  (C)  The Ambassador said it was useful for the AL member 
states to be clear on Iraq's responsibilities to disarm.  The 
Ambassador mentioned specifics from Secretary Powell's 
February 14 UNSC speech, and noted that time will tell if 
Iraq does decide to change its course and disarm.  Qirbi said 
that the U.S. has a major responsibility to support the 
inspectors (read: through intelligence provision). 
 
¶7.  (C)  Ambassador Hull stressed the need to sustain 
pressure on Baghdad.  Even Iraq's recent participation in the 
Tripartite Committee on Gulf War missing was solely the 
result of international pressure, as Iraq had long boycotted 
the meetings.  Still, Iraq refuses to account for Kuwaiti 
missing.  Saddam Hussein responds to pressure and nothing 
else, said the Ambassador.  Qirbi nodded in agreement, 
acknowledging that Yemen's own diplomatic efforts to resolve 
this problem were fruitless as a result of Iraqi 
intransigence. 
 
¶8.  (C)  FM Qirbi agreed that all should continue to pressure 
Iraq, but added that pressure needs to also be placed on the 
U.S. and its allies not to be hasty in the use of military 
force. 
 
¶9.  (C)  Comment:  It is notable that the Yemenis and other 
Arab states did not buy the French proposal on inspections. 
The French Ambassador told Ambassador Hull on February 17 
that Paris had tasked him with demarching on the proposals 
throughout the Eid holiday.  Apparently his efforts did not 
influence the Yemeni position.  End Comment. 
HULL