This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 YEREVAN 002995 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CACEN; DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL AM
SUBJECT:  NEW LAW ON DRAFT EVADERS: AMNESTY THROUGH 
INSTITUTIONALIZED EXTORTION 
 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive But Unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Armenian National Assembly (NA) 
unanimously passed a bill on "Citizens Who Evaded 
Compulsory Military Service" in its second reading 
December 1.  The measure allows citizens over the age 
of 27 who evaded the draft to avoid retroactive 
criminal prosecution by paying a fine. Parliamentarians 
claim the measure is an inducement to Armenians living 
overseas to return home.  Some Armenians contend that 
the bill only formalizes a system of corruption, by 
requiring payment to avoid criminal proceedings for a 
previously unprosecuted crime.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
DRAFT LAW PASSES UNANIMOUSLY 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The Armenian National Assembly unanimously 
passed the law, "Citizens Who Evaded Compulsory 
Military Service with Violation of the Established 
Order" in its second reading December 1.  The bill is 
on the NA's agenda for its extraordinary December 
session, and should pass its third and final reading 
without amendment.  The law, strongly endorsed by both 
government and opposition lawmakers, provides an 
amnesty for male citizens over the age of 27 (or who 
have otherwise become ineligible for the draft) who 
avoided compulsory military service by paying a fee of 
100,000 drams (USD 175) for each of the semi-annual 
draft rounds they evaded.  (NOTE:  Men are required to 
serve in the military for two years when they reach the 
age of 18.  Men are excluded from the draft while 
pursuing undergraduate degrees, defending a doctoral 
thesis, or if they have two or more children.  END 
NOTE.)  Upon payment of the fine (up to USD 3,500 if 
they had been eligible for the full ten years), men 
would be enlisted in the military reserve forces and 
receive an official document from the Ministry of 
Justice indicating that they were free from criminal 
prosecution for draft evasion. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
AMNESTY MEANT TO ATTRACT ARMENIANS LIVING ABROAD 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Vahagn Gevorkian, aide to the NA's Standing 
Committee on Defense and one of the primary drafters of 
the bill, told us that the government is currently 
seeking approximately 16,000 individuals for draft 
evasion.  Gevorkian and other supporters of the bill 
estimate that most of these men are currently abroad, 
having left the country in the 1990s in part to avoid 
military service during the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. 
According to Gevorkian, fear of prosecution has kept 
many of these men from returning to Armenia, where the 
skills they have learned abroad could be put to good 
use.  Amnesty could both provide the government with 
added revenue and add well-trained individuals to the 
workforce. 
 
------------------------------- 
NO NEED TO SERVE IF YOU CAN PAY 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Armenians have anecdotally informed us that 
they know of numerous men, both family and friends, who 
avoided military service by bribing authorities.  No 
one knows of a single individual who has faced legal 
sanction after the age of 27 for failure to serve in 
the military.  (NOTE:  The Ministry of Justice does not 
provide information on the number of individuals it 
prosecutes for draft evasion.  END NOTE.)  Men with the 
necessary connections and financial means will pay both 
local police officials to have their names stricken 
from the list of draft evaders, and the Ministry of 
Defense to secure demobilizion documents.  Those who 
are abroad and wish to return to Armenia currently have 
to coordinate a similar process with family and friends 
so they can enter the country without hindrance. 
Armenians tell us that men can expect pay between USD 
5,000 and USD 10,000 to secure the necessary documents. 
 
------------------------------------- 
COMMENT:  TURNING BRIBES INTO REVENUE 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The law on draft evaders will regularize the 
current process by which men can pay to avoid their 
required military service.  By formally embracing the 
practice, the government raises its own revenue by 
taking control of payments that had previously been 
lining the pockets of corrupt officials.  The NA hopes 
to entice Armenians abroad to return by lowering the 
market price of the demobilization documents, and 
giving the security of a formal amnesty that could 
never be provided by the black market. 
ORDWAY