This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

111222Z Jun 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 003784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY'S GENC PARTY: THE KEMALIST STATE'S NEW 
ALTERNATIVE TO AK? 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 2516 
     ¶B. ISTANBUL 752 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch. Reason: 1.5 (b)(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: As reported in reftels, Motorola deadbeat Cem 
Uzan is trying to moderate Genc Party's 
nationalist-corporatist image by toning down his angry 
anti-U.S., anti-West rhetoric and by recruiting well-known 
politicians from the center-right.  As part of this strategy, 
Uzan has been granting interviews to major dailies (not part 
of his own media empire) in which he has sounded a more 
mainstream, albeit decidedly nationalist, note.  Privately to 
us, prominent Genc officials have tried to explain away 
strongly anti-U.S. Genc ads on television and in newspapers 
prior to Operation Iraqi Freedom as "mere politics."  The 
evolution of Genc strategy reflects its preparations for the 
nation-wide local elections that must be held by April 2004 
but could come sooner.  End summary. 
 
 
------------------- 
The New Opposition? 
------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) Uzan's media blitz is having its intended effect as 
some recent public opinion polls show Genc Party as second 
only to the ruling AK party: at around 16 percent, well 
behind AK but several points ahead of the Establishmentarian 
CHP, which leads the parliamentary opposition.  Contacts 
across the spectrum attribute much of Genc's current 
popularity to Uzan's exploitation of his own numerous media 
outlets and the party's strong, angry nationalist message, 
which continues to resonate with impoverished Turks and 
other, less enlightened social-political elements. 
 
 
-- Like AK and its predecessors, Genc is developing novel 
campaign tactics.  But whereas AK and its like specialize in 
grassroots activism and door-to-door precinct work 
reminiscent of the Chicago machine, Genc is taking its cue 
from the latest trends in U.S-style politicking, running a 
top-down, media-heavy (and media-savvy) campaign 
unprecedented in Turkish political history. 
 
 
-- Selma Acuner, former chairman of the women's group Ka-Der, 
is a close Embassy contact with political ambitions whom Genc 
is trying to recruit.  She told us recently that Uzan has 
quietly established a think tank-like organization in Ankara 
as a policy planning/propaganda center aimed at a more elite 
audience.  According to Acuner, Genc is carefully trying to 
keep its distance publicly from this organization in order 
not to undermine its carefully-nurtured image as an 
"independent" -- and thus credible -- institution. 
 
 
¶3. (C) In a bid to soften Genc's image, Uzan is personally 
staking out more nuanced rhetorical turf.  Gone, for now, are 
the media ads explicitly suggesting that the U.S. is bent on 
attacking Turkey militarily.  (This theme, which Uzan 
propounded in print and on the airwaves in the months before 
the Iraq war, undoubtedly is reflected in recent opinion 
surveys purporting to show a significant level of public 
animosity toward the United States.)  While Uzan himself is 
maintaining his opposition to the war, he also criticizes the 
AK government for failing to negotiate a better deal from the 
USG in return for Turkey's support.  Privately in meetings 
with us, Genc officials -- including Ahmet Oguz Ozcu, an 
executive in the Uzan business empire who is formally the 
party's Number Two man -- have tried to explain that the USG 
"misunderstands" Genc, that the anti-American ad campaigns 
and stump speeches are "just politics."  When repeatedly told 
that Genc rhetoric is irresponsible and does not square with 
the party's effort to fashion a more moderate image, Genc 
officials say only that the Genc message is "not 
anti-American, but pro-Turkey." 
 
 
¶4. (C) There are other signs that the Uzan way of doing 
business survives the Genc makeover attempt.  A leading 
banker told Ambassador that the Uzan's Cukurova Electricity 
Company has abused its monopoly in electricity generation, 
transmission and distribution in the southern city of Adana 
to extort money and favors from local industry.  Other 
sources tell us Cukurova Electricity has failed to honor its 
investment commitments to the GOT, and has failed to comply 
with a GOT regulation requiring it to turn over its 
electricity transmission facilities to the Government. 
Istanbul banking sources say the Uzan's bank, Imar, is a 
"black hole," in that the entire financial community has no 
idea what, if any, banking business it does. 
------- 
AK Wary 
------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) The ruling AK Party increasingly sees Genc, not Deniz 
Baykal's CHP, as its most serious challenger on the national 
scene.  They privately concede that Genc is likely eventually 
to establish a geographic electoral base in Izmir -- where 
Genc polled remarkably well in the Nov. 2003 national 
elections -- and other Aegean provinces that had previously 
been a bastion of Kemalist/Establishmentarian probity. 
Indeed, AK vice chairman Firat asserted to us recently that 
the Genc threat is spurring AK to tie up loose ends -- even 
in Ankara, where the strained relations between Mayor Gokcek, 
formerly with Refah/Fazilet, and P.M/AK Chairman Erdogan 
could split the AK constituency and provide an opportunity 
for the party's rivals.  According to Firat, Erdogan's effort 
to woo Gokcek into the AK fold is showing signs of bearing 
fruit.  "Erdogan is no fool," he said. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
The New "Party of the State?" 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Genc officials hope to present themselves as the 
"choice of the State" and, with CHP apparently going no where 
politically, as the only real choice for Establishment types 
worried about AK.  Several contacts tell us that, 
consequently, Uzan is reaching out to the military for 
support.  Several prominent Genc members have privately 
asserted to us that they have contacts among senior military 
officials.  Leading journalists, including "Hurriyet's" 
Cuneyt Ulsever, and senior officials in AK and other parties, 
assess that the "Genc alternative" resonates with elements of 
the Turkish State.  According to center-right DYP Vice 
Chairman M. Salim Ensarioglu, retired Gen. Cevik Bir, former 
TGS Deputy Chief and a principal figure in the "post-modern" 
coup of 1997 against the then Islamist-led government, is on 
the Genc payroll as a party "coordinator." 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
Genc and the Transformation of the Establishment: 
Implications 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) Genc's angry nationalism is not new.  The party's 
understanding of the world has much in common with that of 
the MHP (junior partner in the previous government and voted 
out of Parliament in the Nov. 2002 election that brought AK 
to power) and the numerous, fledgling Kemalist parties led by 
such Establishmentarian/Deep State stalwarts as former 
Supreme Court President Yetka Gungor Ozden and retired Chief 
Prosecutor Vural Savas (septel).  What is different now is 
that Erdogan and AK are in power, while CHP is proving a 
disappointment to an Establishment eager for someone to 
undercut the AK challenge to the status quo.  As a result, 
Genc is seeking to exploit the Turkish State's discomfort -- 
and any AK economic or other missteps that turn off voters -- 
to establish itself as a contender. 
 
 
¶8. (C) For Uzan, a key political question will be whether, 
and to what extent, Turkey's Kemalist elites write off "the 
Party of Ataturk" and turn to Genc.  As demonstrated in the 
2002 elections, Genc already has a foothold in areas 
previously dominated by the Establishment.  In this context, 
the nationwide local elections, which must be held by April 
2004, could be a herald of things to come. 
PEARSON