This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 20 HANOI 001808 
 
SIPDIS 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA 
DEPT PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KTDB ETRD EINV ECON ELAB ETRD OPIC VN FINREF BTA
SUBJECT: VIETNAM: 2003 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 128494 
 
¶1.  This cable provides the text of the 2003 Investment 
Climate Statement for Vietnam. As requested reftel, post 
has also sent the ICS via email to EB/IFD/OIA. 
 
2.Begin text of the 2003 Investment Climate Statement 
for Vietnam: 
 
INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT - 2003 
 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
A1. Openness to Foreign Investment 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Vietnam, in principle, maintains a policy of 
encouragement of foreign investment.  A crucial element in 
its long-term development strategy is the continued ability 
to attract and utilize relatively large amounts of overseas 
capital, both foreign direct investment (FDI) and official 
development assistance (ODA).   (Vietnam does not yet allow 
any significant foreign portfolio investment.)  For the 
2001-2005 period, the Government of Vietnam (GVN) has 
established targets for FDI at US$ 11 billion in 
disbursements from existing and newly licensed foreign 
investments and for approximately US$ 10-11 billion in ODA 
disbursed by foreign donors, for a total of US$ 21-22 
billion from foreign sources, the levels of FDI and ODA it 
estimates are required to support the government's GDP 
growth target of 7.5 percent per year. 
 
¶2.  By April 2003, Vietnam had attracted nearly US$ 39 
billion in investment commitments since the country was 
opened to foreign investment in 1988.  Approximately US$22 
billion, or 56 percent, of that amount has been disbursed 
in more than 3,897 projects.   Sixty-four percent of 
disbursed investment was made into projects concentrated in 
or near the two major cities of Ho Chi Minh City in the 
south and Hanoi in the north.  U.S. businesses have 
received 163 investment licenses for projects worth US$ 
1,128 million and have injected US$563 million thus far 
into Vietnam.  Significant additional U.S. investment is 
counted as investment from third countries in cases where, 
for example, the investment involves a third-country 
subsidiary of a U.S. company. 
 
¶3.  As the GVN continues to proceed with its long-standing 
policy of reform of the economy, openness to foreign 
business, and integration of the nation into the world 
economy, Vietnam's rapidly growing population of 79 million 
should become an increasingly attractive investment 
destination.  Vietnam entered into the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation forum (APEC) in late 1998.  It is 
committed to enter into and fully comply with its 
obligations under the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) by 2006. 
In addition, it is currently engaged in negotiations to 
join the World Trade Organization (WTO).  Perhaps the 
strongest recent signals of the country's commitment to 
economic reform and improving business climate were entry- 
into-force of the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement 
(BTA) in December 2001 and completion of agreements on 
economic reform with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
and World Bank also in 2001.  In light of Vietnam's strong 
macroeconomic performance despite the global economic 
downturn and continued progress on economic reform, 
Standard and Poor's assigned Vietnam's foreign and local 
currency bonds a BB minus long term and a B minus short 
term rating and labeled the long term outlook stable. 
Moody's assigned Vietnam a B1 long-term rating and, in June 
2002, labeled  its outlook  positive.  These developments, 
taken together with the country's relatively low-wage work 
force and natural resource base, are convincing foreign 
investors to consider Vietnam when looking for their next 
investment location 
 
¶4. However, despite an official policy encouraging foreign 
investment and a solid economic performance, Vietnam 
remains a difficult investment environment and potential 
investors should carefully scrutinize any investment plans. 
Currently in a period of transition from a command economy 
to a 'state-supervised' market economy in which the state 
sector retains a 'leading role,' Vietnam is implementing a 
series of gradual reforms that will enable the economy to 
function more efficiently.  As the GVN engages in this 
complex process, foreign investors must cope with a wide 
range of problems and costs.  These include poorly 
developed infrastructure, underdeveloped and cumbersome 
legal and financial systems, an unwieldy bureaucracy, non- 
transparent regulations, high start-up costs, arcane land 
acquisition and transfer regulations and procedures, and 
shortage of trained personnel.  Issuance of investment 
licenses can be a lengthy process.  Moreover, investment 
projects in both pre- and post-establishment phases must 
cope with frequent changes in the investment environment in 
areas such as taxes, tariffs, import and export policies 
and procedures.  Additionally, the Vietnamese courts have 
so far proved unwilling or unable to enforce laws related 
to investor protections, in particular, the enforcement of 
arbitral awards.  Finally, investors cite official 
corruption as a significant problem in establishing and 
running their business.  In particular, investments 
involving joint ventures with State-owned enterprises have 
proven especially vulnerable to corruption and abuse. 
 
¶5.  Foreign investment in Vietnam is regulated by the 
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) through the Law 
on Foreign Investment (LFI) and related implementing 
regulations, decrees, and circulars.   It was first 
introduced in 1989 when the country was opened up to 
investment and was followed by a series of amendments and 
supplements in order to improve the climate for foreign 
investors.  The latest guiding regulation is Governmental 
Decree Number 27 issued in March 2003.  It provides 
amendments of and to the 2000 Decree Number 24, which 
promulgated detailed regulations on the implementation of 
the LFI.  It includes an explicit pledge against 
expropriation , guarantees the right to repatriate profits, 
and states the GVN's intent to treat private and State 
sectors equally.  The law provides significant fiscal and 
tax incentives to attract foreign capital. 
 
¶6. There are four primary forms of investment for 
foreigners in Vietnam: 
 
a)  Joint venture (JV) agreements  pair foreign and local 
companies sharing capital and profits.  The contribution of 
the local company, typically a State-owned enterprise 
(SOE), to the JV frequently consists solely of land use 
rights.  The minimum percentage of foreign involvement in a 
JV is 30 percent, but examples of JVs where the foreign 
partner is not a majority shareholder are rare.  The 
minority partner retains veto power over the majority 
partner concerning selection of senior management and 
changes in the JV charter.  However, under the BTA these 
rights will be phased out within three years of entry into 
force of the agreement for U.S. investors.  Joint ventures 
account for the majority of foreign investment to date  as 
many investors find JVs attractive because they can benefit 
from the assistance of an established Vietnamese firm in 
dealing with bureaucratic and administrative procedures. 
They also provide  foreign investors access to land which 
may otherwise be difficult to secure.  Some investors 
complain the government allows local partners to overvalue 
their land use rights. 
 
b)  Business Cooperation Contracts (BCC) permit a foreign 
firm to pursue business interests in cooperation with a 
Vietnamese firm by investing capital and sharing revenues 
without conferring the right of establishment or ownership. 
In many respects, it is the most flexible arrangement 
Vietnam offers to foreign investors.  However, a BCC 
license typically does not contain tax holidays or 
concessions given to other types of foreign investments. 
BCC's have predominated in the telecommunications sector 
and, as production sharing contracts, in the petroleum 
sector, where the government limits foreign involvement in 
operations and management. 
 
c)  100-percent Foreign-Owned Enterprises have become more 
popular recently, as investors have learned to navigate the 
local system on their own.  The GVN has shown increasing 
willingness to permit them on a case-by-case basis, 
particularly in industrial production for export. 
 
d)  Build-operate-transfer (BOT) agreements are the least 
commonly used form of foreign investment.  While authorized 
under the LFI and specific BOT legislation, the legal, 
regulatory, and financial framework for BOT's remains 
incomplete. The LFI also recognizes build-operate-own 
(BOO), build-transfer-operate (BTO), and build-transfer 
(BT) forms of investment.  Under a BOT agreement the 
investor builds an infrastructure project, operates it for 
an agreed period of time to recover the investment and earn 
a profit, and then cedes it to the government without 
further compensation.  Several foreign-invested BOT 
licenses have been granted, but many others have been held 
up in protracted negotiations.  The most intractable BOT 
issues have been financing, product pricing and government 
regulatory and cost-recovery guarantees. 
 
¶7.  Foreign investors have pressured the Vietnamese 
government for years to expand the permissible forms of 
foreign investment.  The Ministry of Planning and 
Investment (MPI) has submitted to the Government the final 
draft of the decree providing for the establishment of new 
foreign invested shareholding companies (FISCs) and the 
conversion of existing foreign invested enterprises into 
FISCs, in which both foreign and Vietnamese investors may 
purchase shares (subject to maximum 30% foreign 
shareholding). Currently 24 foreign invested enterprises 
operating in Vietnam are seeking permission to convert to a 
FISC, though it not known in which sectors FISCs will be 
permitted. However no approval has been issued to date. 
 
Recent reforms under the Government Decree Number 27 issued 
in March 2003 include: 
 
A new 100% Foreign Owned Enterprise (FOE) may now be formed 
between an existing FOE and (i) another existing FOE and/or 
(ii) new foreign investor(s); 
A Business Cooperation Contract may now be established by 
an existing joint venture enterprise or an existing FOE 
with another foreign organization or individual; 
A new Joint Venture Enterprise (JVE) may now be established 
between an existing FOE and a Vietnamese enterprise or 
between an existing FOE and an existing JVE. However, a JVE 
may not be established between an existing FOE and a 
foreign investor or an overseas Vietnamese investor. 
 
Decree 27 also abolishes the restriction that any legal 
capital (equity) in the form of technology transfer must 
not exceed 20% of legal capital, and is subject only to 
agreement by the parties of the company. 
 
¶8.  At present the Government maintains an extensive 
investment licensing process which is characterized by 
stringent and time-consuming requirements that are 
frequently used to protect domestic interests, limit 
competition and allocate foreign investment rights among 
various countries.   The Ministry of Planning and 
Investment (MPI) is the primary point of contact for most 
foreign investors.  But Vietnam currently does not offer a 
'one-stop shop' for investment negotiation and approval. 
Foreign investors typically must contact and obtain support 
and/or approvals from a number of national and local 
agencies; indeed, licensing approval is required from other 
ministries or government bodies which regulate particular 
sectors, especially oil and gas, pharmaceuticals, financial 
services.  In addition, investors may not always be aware 
of all regulatory requirements for licenses, which has led 
at times to complaints of unfair or discriminatory 
treatment.   Licensing is required not only for 
establishment, but also in order to make significant 
changes to an operating concern such as increase investment 
capital, restructure the company by changing the form of 
investment or investment ratios between foreign and 
domestic partners, or add additional business activities. 
 
¶9.   In the early 1990's, all foreign investment projects 
required approval by the Prime Minister.  Overtime, in an 
effort to reduce obstacles to foreign investment, this list 
of projects subject to approval at the highest levels was 
reduced.  At present, Prime Ministerial approval is 
required for investment licenses for the following: 
 
projects with investment capital in excess of US$ 40 
million in electricity; mining, metallurgy, cement, 
mechanical engineering, manufacture, chemicals, hotels, 
apartments for lease, tourism and entertainment; 
projects of any value in the following sectors: 
Infrastructure construction of industrial zones (IZ) and 
export processing zones (EPZ), urban areas, build-operate- 
transfer, build-transfer-operate and build-transfer 
projects; 
Construction and operation of seaports and airports; 
operation of sea and air transportation; 
Oil and gas; 
Post and telecommunications services; 
Culture; including publishing, press; radio and television 
broadcasting; medical examination and treatment 
establishments; education and training; scientific research 
and production of medicine for human diseases; 
Insurance, finance, auditing and inspection; 
Exploration and exploitation of rare and precious natural 
resources; 
Construction of residences for sale; and, 
National defense and security projects. 
 
projects that use five hectares or more of urban land or 50 
hectares or more of rural land. 
 
 
¶10.  Vietnamese authorities evaluate investment license 
applications using a number of criteria including: 
 
the legal status and financial capabilities of the foreign 
and Vietnamese investors; 
the project's compatibility with Vietnam's 'Master Plan' 
for economic and social development; 
the benefits accruing to the government or to the 
Vietnamese party, especially acquisition of new production 
capabilities, industries, technologies, expansion of 
markets; and job creation; 
projected revenue; 
technology and expertise; 
efficient use of resources; 
environmental protection; 
plans for land use and land clearance compensation; 
project incentives including tax rates and land, water, and 
sea surface rental fees. 
 
¶11.  Overtime, the GVN has gradually but steadily improved 
its investment licensing regime.  Greater authority over 
investment licensing has been devolved to provinces, 
municipalities, and investment zones.   Provincial People's 
committees now have authority to issue investment licenses 
for projects not subject to Prime Ministerial approval 
which do not exceed US$ 5 million in invested capital, or 
US$ 10 million in invested capital in the areas of Hanoi 
and Ho Chi Minh City.   MPI may also authorize Provincial 
Industrial and Export Processing Zone Management Boards to 
issue investment licenses for projects those projects which 
are not subject to approval by the Prime Minister and not 
exceeding US$ 40 million.   Several provincial committees 
and IZ management boards have significantly streamlined 
licensing procedures in their jurisdictions, reducing the 
time to days if not hours in some cases.  While this 
decentralization is frequently in the foreign investor's 
favor, it has also given rise to considerable regional 
differences in procedure and interpretation of relevant 
investment law and regulation. 
 
¶12.   In addition, the 2000 amendment to the LFI added a 
"Registration" licensing procedure where previously only an 
"evaluation" or approval procedure had existed.  Under 
Registration procedures:  projects cannot be refused a 
license so long as all the necessary documents have been 
submitted; the applicants are not required to submit a 
detailed feasibility study; and the review time limit is 
only 15 days compared to the 45-day period mandated for the 
licensing via the Evaluation procedure.  Registration 
procedures are only open to those projects which are not 
subject to prime ministerial approval and/or environmental 
impact assessment.  Furthermore, projects submitted for 
Registration must satisfy at least one of the following 
conditions: 
 
Export all products; 
Invest in an IZ and satisfy all relevant export 
requirements; or 
Invest in the manufacturing sector, with invested capital 
less than or equal to US$ 5 million and export at least 80% 
of production. 
 
¶13.   Because it recognizes the need for increased foreign 
direct investment if Vietnam is to reach the ambitious 
development goal set out in the 2001-2010 Socio-Economic 
Development strategy, the GVN has a policy of  trying to 
improve the climate for investment, although that policy 
does not always translate into concrete action.  Perhaps 
the single most important event in Vietnam's recent 
economic history is the entry-into-force of the U.S.- 
Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA).   As Vietnam's 
commitments in the BTA are implemented, it will help ensure 
fair access and treatment for U.S. investment, goods and 
services.   The BTA provides a broad range of benefits for 
U.S. investment in Vietnam that should significantly 
enhance the investment environment for U.S. firms.   A 
major part of the BTA is devoted to investment which: 
provides national and most-favored-nation treatment, except 
where explicit exceptions have been made; guarantees access 
to third-party investor-state dispute settlement; 
disciplines trade-related investment measures; ensures 
treatment of expropriation consistent with international 
standards.  In addition, other chapters of the BTA will 
reduce tariffs and quantitative restrictions on U.S. 
investor's imports; permit U.S. investors to engage 
directly in trade; require the government to operate more 
transparently; open sectors of interest to U.S. business 
including banking, insurance, professional services, 
telecommunications, distribution, etc.; and provide 
protection consistent with World Trade Organization (WTO)- 
standards for U.S. investors' intellectual property. 
 
¶14.  Also, a number of important policy decisions and legal 
changes have been made which are intended to create a more 
open, business friendly investment climate for foreign and 
domestic private investment alike.  On December 25, 2001, 
the National Assembly adopted changes to the Constitution 
of 1992 which contained several business related items in 
Articles 15 and 16.  One provided the constitutional basis 
for Vietnam's integration into the international economy. 
Another formally recognized the foreign direct investment 
and the domestic private sectors as components within the 
Vietnamese economy in addition to the already recognized 
sector comprising SOEs.  Previously, the approach under 
Vietnamese law was to permit business to only engage in 
those activities for which they had explicit permission. 
The amendment package formally stated the principle that 
businesses could engage in all activities except those 
prohibited by law.   These constitutional changes codified 
at the Constitutional level, changes in approach with 
respect to foreign and domestic private sector investment 
contained in the economic reforms of the 1990's, lending 
them a level of permanence that they had heretofore not 
enjoyed. 
 
¶15.  In addition, in 2001-2002, hs, both the Government and 
the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) issued policy 
documents supportive of the private sector, domestic and 
foreign.  In August 2001, the Government signaled its 
intent to continue to improve the climate for foreign 
investment when it issued a resolution calling for 
continued efforts to improve Vietnam's attractiveness to 
foreign investment in the next five years by: 
 
expanding of the sectors open to foreign investment, to 
include the real estate, import services and domestic 
distribution; 
easing the conditions for foreign-ownership of equitized 
state-owned enterprises; 
permitting foreign invested enterprises (FIE's) to issue 
stock to be sold on the local stock exchange; 
facilitating foreign investors' participation in BOT's; 
narrowing the list of prohibited FIE exports; 
establishment of a level playing field among foreign, 
domestic private and state-owned enterprises; and 
continuing reform of law and regulation on foreign 
investment. 
 
¶16.  Perhaps more significantly, the CPV issued a 
resolution in March 2002 clearly stating its support for a 
mixed economy with equal treatment of foreign, private 
domestic and state-owned enterprises.  In this document, 
the CPV made several important recommendations which, when 
translated into actual policy, will provide significant 
support for the private sector in the future including: 
continuing reforms to make it easier to do private 
businesses; eliminating discriminatory treatment of 
domestic or foreign private sector activity; making clear 
distinctions between civil and criminal offenses so as to 
avoid the prevalent criminalization of certain commercial 
decisions and disputes; simplified lending procedures to 
give private enterprise greater access to domestic credit; 
and amendment of existing accounting procedures to 
encourage private enterprise to perform financial audits 
and disclose the results annually. 
 
¶17.   The above actions strongly indicate the Vietnamese 
leadership's intention to continue to improve the country's 
foreign investment climate, even if its efforts sometimes 
fall short.  This effort began in 1989 when the country 
adopted the Law on Foreign Investment (LFI) and has 
continued with four major amendments of the LFI, the most 
recent in 2000, and the issuance and amendment of numerous 
implementing regulations.   Most recently, the GVN has 
issued laws and regulations intended to facilitate foreign 
investment by reducing or eliminating discrimination 
against foreign investors in pricing for goods and 
services, transfer requirements, use of land use rights for 
mortgaging purposes, unanimity rules applying to certain 
decisions made by joint venture boards, rights of first 
sale and many others.   Many of these changes were mandated 
under the BTA. 
 
¶18.  Nonetheless, many additional official measures that 
discriminate against foreign investment  persist.  These 
can be found listed among the permanent exceptions to the 
non-discrimination obligations contained in the BTA 
investment chapter. Some must be eliminated at a later date 
under the BTA; others will remain indefinitely. 
Additionally, Vietnam continues to impose unofficial and 
arbitrary measures that negatively affect foreign investors 
and in some cases, threaten their capital investments. 
 
¶19.  At present, most foreign importers are barred from 
direct participation in Vietnam's distribution system, 
although foreign investors have the right to sell, market, 
and distribute what they manufacture locally.  Foreign 
investors have the right to import goods needed for their 
investment projects, provided this right is included in 
their investment licenses, however, they must import the 
goods through licensed Vietnamese import/export firms.  An 
exception is made for foreign manufacturers importing 
inputs directly to production when such import rights are 
explicitly included in their investment licenses.  Under 
the BTA, trading rights and market access in distribution 
services for foreign investors will be gradually expanded. 
While Vietnam has greatly expanded in recent years the 
number of Vietnamese firms permitted import/export rights, 
the vast majority of general import/export companies remain 
SOE's. 
 
¶20.  The GVN holds regular 'business forum' meetings with 
domestic and foreign business associations to discuss 
issues of importance to the private sector.  Foreign 
investors use these meetings to draw attention to 
impediments to investment and commerce imposed by 
Vietnamese law and regulation as well as by improper 
implementation.  These fora, together with frequent 
dialogues between GVN officials and foreign investors held 
between the semi-annual fora, have led to improved 
communication and have sometimes allowed foreign investors 
to make timely comments on and influence legal and 
procedural reforms. 
 
¶21.  Foreign enterprises also have the right to apply to the 
Ministry of Trade or the Service of Trade in Hanoi or Ho 
Chi Minh City for a representative office license, which 
gives foreign firms the right to conduct market research 
and to pursue business interests, short of actually selling 
products and services in Vietnam.  Foreign banks must apply 
to the State Bank of Vietnam for representative office or 
bank branch licenses. 
 
¶22. Previosly, Vietnam applied different corporate income 
tax rates to foreign investors and to domestic enterprises 
(being 25% and 32% respectively). The National Assembly in 
its May 2003 session approved the Ministry of Finance 
amendments to the Law on Corporate Income Tax, w.  which 
provide for a uniform rate of 28% applied to foreign 
invested and domestic businesses, representing a 3% 
increase for foreign invested enterprises and a 4% 
reduction for domestic companies. Tax incentives will also 
be the same for both foreign invested and domestic 
enterprises and will be offered to investors in selected 
priority sectors and in remote areas. The Amended Law on 
Corporate Income Tax is takes effects 1 January 2004. The 
Ministry of Finance also proposed to abolish profit 
remittance tax for foreign invested enterprises.    Foreign 
investors have sought changes to the high personal income 
tax rates for Vietnamese national employees in the higher 
pay scales, which significantly increases the gross salary 
employers must pay to maintain competitive and reasonable 
take home salaries. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
A2. Conversion and Transfer Policies 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶23. Vietnam's foreign exchange regime has been 
significantly improved with the amendments to the LFI (the 
2000 Governmental Decree Number 24 and 2003 Decree Number 
27), which explicitly gave foreign investors the right to 
exchange local currency for foreign currency for the 
purpose of meeting certain current transactions or 
remitting certain categories of earnings.  In addition, 
conversion of Vietnamese dong into hard currency no longer 
requires a foreign exchange license.  Despite these 
significant improvements, various subsequent decrees and 
circulars issued by the State Bank continue to stipulate 
conditions on, among other things, the opening of bank 
accounts, conversion of Vietnamese Dong into foreign 
currency, documentation requirements, and remittance of 
foreign currency in and out of the country. 
 
¶24.  Foreign businesses are allowed to remit profits, 
shared revenues from joint-ventures, incomes from services 
and technology transfers, legally-owned capital and 
properties in hard currency.  Foreigners also are allowed 
to remit abroad royalties and fees paid for the supply of 
technologies and services, principal and interest on loans 
obtained for business operations, and investment capital 
and other money and assets under their legitimate 
ownership.  But their ability to convert dong into hard 
currency is subject to availability, causing Foreign- 
invested-enterprises (FIEs) to experience problems in 
securing hard currency.  No information on average delays 
in remitting investment returns is available.  Approval by 
investment authorities is needed to increase or decrease 
the capital of a foreign-invested business. 
 
¶25.  In principle, most FIEs are expected to be 'self- 
sufficient' for their foreign exchange requirements, 
although this sometimes proves impractical.  Government of 
Vietnam guarantees to assist in the balancing of foreign 
currency for foreign invested enterprises and foreign 
business cooperation parties that invest in the 
construction of infrastructure and certain other important 
projects in the event that banks permitted to trade foreign 
currency are unable to fully satisfy their foreign currency 
demand. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
A.3. Expropriation and Compensation 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶26.  The U.S. Embassy knows of no recent instances of 
expropriation of a foreign investment by the Government of 
Vietnam. 
 
¶27.  Under the BTA, in any future case of expropriation or 
nationalization of U.S. investor assets, Vietnam will be 
obligated to apply international standards of treatment - 
that is taking such an action for a public purpose; in a 
non-discriminatory manner; in accordance with due process 
of law; and with payment of prompt, adequate and effective 
compensation. 
 
---------------------------- 
A.4. Dispute settlement 
----------------------------- 
 
¶28. Vietnam's legal system, including dispute and claims 
settlement mechanisms, remains underdeveloped and sometimes 
biased against foreign entities.  Negotiation between the 
concerned parties is the most common and preferred means of 
dispute resolution.  Although contracts are extremely 
difficult to enforce in Vietnam, particularly if one party 
to a dispute is a foreigner, investors generally should 
negotiate and include dispute resolution procedures in 
their contracts.  However, even with such provisions, 
resolution is not guaranteed. 
 
¶29.  In the event of an investment dispute, there are a 
number of domestic avenues available.  Economic courts, in 
addition to hearing bankruptcy cases, also have 
jurisdiction over cases involving business disputes. 
Administrative courts hear cases that concern alleged 
infractions of administrative procedures by government 
authorities.  In such cases, the plaintiff must pay a bond 
to the court, half of which is forfeited if the dispute is 
resolved before the beginning of court proceedings.  Also, 
the court proceedings must begin within six months of the 
date of the dispute.  Many international investors express 
concerns about the ability of the court system to 
impartially and promptly render a decision that accurately 
reflects the facts and properly interprets the relevant 
Vietnamese law and/or international law and practice. 
Thus, they prefer to have other options available to them. 
According to Vietnamese press accounts, many court 
judgments on business issues are ignored because the 
affected party can use "influence" to forestall the 
application of the judgment. 
 
¶30.  Outside of the court system, economic arbitration 
centers operate in a number of provinces and cities. 
However, it is not clear if these centers are legally 
competent to settle disputes involving foreign parties. The 
second type of arbitration institution in Vietnam is the 
Vietnam International Arbitration Center (VIAC), which 
operates in close coordination with the Vietnam Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry (VCCI).  It has authority to settle 
disputes arising from international economic transactions 
including contracts on foreign trade and investment. 
However, it is not clear if investors would be free to 
choose foreign arbitrators.  Nor can international standard 
arbitration rules, such as those of the International 
Chamber of Commerce (ICC) or the United Nations Commission 
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), be used.  The 
decisions of the VIAC are final and cannot be appealed to 
any domestic court. The center does not yet have an 
established track record for competence or impartiality, 
and questions have been raised about the enforceability of 
its awards. The Government is scheduled to submit an 
Ordinance on Commercial Arbitration to the National 
Assembly in 2002, which may improve the domestic commercial 
arbitration system.  But for now, most foreign parties 
choose to stipulate "third party" arbitration in their 
contracts with Vietnamese parties and the government. 
 
¶31.  Foreign and domestic arbitral awards are technically 
legally enforceable in Vietnam.  Vietnam acceded to the New 
York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of 
Foreign Arbitral Awards in 1995, meaning that foreign 
arbitral awards rendered by a recognized international 
arbitration institution must be respected by Vietnamese 
courts without a review of the case's merit.  In practice, 
however, the U.S. Embassy is aware of contradicting 
judgments and decisions by different Vietnamese courts with 
regards to a foreign arbitral award for a case between a 
subsidiary of a U.S. firm and an Australian-Vietnamese 
joint venture.  The foreign arbitral award was recognized 
by a municipal Economic Court, but was subsequently 
reversed by the Supreme Court (the highest judicial level) 
upon appeal.  The Supreme Court rearbitrated the case in 
Vietnam (contrary to the agreed upon procedures in the 
contract) and ruled that as a construction contract did not 
fit the narrow definition of commercial contract found in 
the Commercial Code, a foreign arbitral award relating to 
it could not be enforced in Vietnam. The results of this 
case indicated that the enforceability of a foreign 
arbitral award in Vietnam currently remains questionable. 
In February 2003, the Government tried to address some of 
the issues addressed by this case through an Ordinance on 
Commercial Arbitration.  The ordinance defines "commercial 
activities" more broadly to include, inter alia, leasing, 
construction, consultancy, licensing, investment, 
financing, banking, insurance, exploration, mining 
activities and transportation.  But, it is not clear 
whether this change will positively affect the way courts 
address these issues. 
¶32.   Under the investment chapter of the BTA, Vietnam 
gives U.S. investors the right to choose a variety of third 
party dispute settlement mechanisms in the event of an 
investment dispute with the GVN.  Vietnam has not yet 
acceded to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment 
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States 
(ICSID), but has asked the U.S. to provide advice in this 
area as part of the U.S. technical assistance program 
designed to assist Vietnam to fully implement the BTA. 
 
¶33.  For the time being, exit strategies for foreign 
investors remain limited and problematic.  GVN permission 
is required to liquidate an investment or business venture 
and is sometimes hard to get.  At present, the bankruptcy 
process can be quite complicated and often takes more than 
a year to complete.  The Bankruptcy Law applies to all 
domestic and foreign-invested companies except national 
defense and public service organizations, but since its 
enactment only a small number of firms have been put into 
bankruptcy proceedings and declared bankrupt. In addition, 
if the partner is a state-owned enterprise, it remains 
unclear who is ultimately assumes the debts of the SOEs. 
To date, the Government asserts that it is not financially 
responsible for SOE debts unless it has pledged a sovereign 
guarantee. 
---------------------------------------- 
A.5. Performance Requirements/Incentives 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶34.   While Vietnam is not yet a member of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), under the BTA Vietnam is obligated to 
gradually discontinue application of any trade-related 
investment measures (TRIMS) or performance requirements 
inconsistent with the WTO TRIMS agreement.  Vietnam 
currently does impose a number of performance requirements 
with respect to the establishment of an investment and/or 
the receipt of a benefit or incentive.  The BTA stipulates 
Vietnam must phase out several TRIMS-inconsistent local 
content requirements within five years or less of the BTA's 
entry-into-force.  Vietnam has eliminated trade-balancing 
requirements previously imposed through restrictions on the 
importation of goods used for production by foreign 
investors.  In the same vein, it has removed foreign 
exchange balancing requirements.  Under the BTA, Vietnam is 
also obligated to refrain from imposing requirements to 
transfer technology as a condition for the establishment, 
expansion, acquisition, management, conduct or operation of 
an investment. 
 
¶35. The GVN employs an extensive range of incentives in an 
attempt to attract foreign investment into certain priority 
sectors or geographical regions.  The LFI and subsequent 
decrees authorize MPI to 'encourage investment in 
mountainous and remote areas' of the country and in regions 
with 'difficult economic and social conditions'.  MPI also 
encourages investment in export production, agricultural 
and forestry production, high technology, ecology, research 
and development, labor-intensive processing of raw 
materials, and large industrial and/or infrastructure 
projects.  The law also favors, to a lesser degree, 
investments in metallurgy, basic chemicals, petrochemicals, 
fertilizer manufacture, manufacturing (especially 
electronic components and car and motorbike parts), and 
planting industrial crops.  Under Circulars 1817 and 1818 
(1999), the Ministry of Science, Technology, and 
Environment (MOSTE) also encourages projects in the areas 
of treatment of environmental pollution and waste, 
production of new or rare and precious materials, 
application of new biological technology, application of 
new technology for manufacturing communication and 
telecommunication equipment, and electronic and informatics 
technology.  More recently, the GVN opened the healthcare 
and education sectors more widely to foreign investment and 
began providing a variety of incentives for such 
investment.   Although the GVN encourages investment in the 
provinces, enforcement of investor protections and BTA 
rights with Provincial Authorities has proven difficult at 
best.  Investors should use due diligence when working at 
the Provincial or local levels. 
 
¶36.  Under the LFI, the standard rate of corporate income 
tax rate is 25%, with preferential rates for designated 
project categories.  However, various tax reforms are 
proposed for 2003, including applying the same corporate 
income tax rate (28%) and tax incentives to both domestic 
and foreign-invested enterprises. 
 
¶37.  Depending on the sector, FIEs and foreign parties to a 
BCC may be exempted from profits tax for a maximum period 
of two years commencing from the first profit-making year 
and may be allowed a 50 percent reduction of profits tax 
for a maximum period of two consecutive years.  Certain 
'encouraged' projects may be exempted from profit tax for 
up to four years from their first profitable year and may 
be allowed a 50 percent reduction of profits tax for a 
further four years.  Where the investment is 'especially 
encouraged,' the maximum period of tax exemption shall be 
eight years.  Such exemptions are generally written into a 
company's investment license. 
 
¶38. The law on export and import duties specifies the rates 
which FIEs and parties to BCC's must pay on exports and 
imports.  Equipment, machinery, specialized means of 
transportation, components and spare parts for machinery 
and equipment, raw materials and inputs for manufacturing, 
and construction materials that cannot be produced 
domestically, which are imported to Vietnam to form fixed 
assets of an FIE or a BCC are exempted from import duties. 
Other exemptions or reductions of import and export duties 
can be stipulated by the GVN for 'encouraged' projects and 
are also generally contained in an enterprise's investment 
license 
 
¶39. Other special incentives are available to foreign 
investors in build-operate-transfer (BOT) projects and 
projects located in export processing zones (EPZ) and 
industrial zone (IZ).  BOTs may be joint ventures or 100% 
foreign-owned.  They are exempt from land tax and from 
payment of duties on goods imported to implement the 
contracts.  They enjoy a lower profits tax rate (10%), a 
five percent withholding tax rate (the lowest normal rate), 
an eight-year tax holiday starting from the first 
profitable year, and a government guarantee for conversion 
of revenue from local to foreign currency.  The term of a 
BOT can extend to 50 years, after which project ownership 
reverts to the government. 
 
¶40.  Projects in EPZs are entitled to profit tax rates of 
10-12% for the duration of the investments.  EPZs were the 
first production zones developed in Vietnam, but interest 
in them has been less than anticipated due to inadequate 
infrastructure and a requirement that these firms export 
100% of their product.  Ho Chi Minh City's Tan Thuan Zone 
is Vietnam's largest EPZ, while others are planned or in 
operation in Danang, Can Tho, Hanoi, and Ho Chi Minh City. 
Export-producing firms wishing to operate in an EPZ apply 
for licenses and pay taxes directly to the EPZ management 
boards, which streamlines the process.  Imports of 
machinery and raw materials enter the zones duty-free, and 
EPZ firms sometimes also benefit from lower rents, fewer 
regulations, and a variety of tax incentives. 
 
¶41.  IZs are open to companies engaged in construction, 
manufacturing, processing or assembly of industrial 
products, and service to support industrial production. 
Companies submit license applications and pay taxes 
directly to the IZ management boards.  IZ firms also are 
eligible for certain tax benefits, including a 10% profit 
tax for the duration of the investment.  Companies that 
reinvest profits may be eligible for refund of profit 
taxes.  Foreign-invested automobile manufacturing projects 
are subject to local content requirements in their 
investment licenses. 
 
¶42.  Vietnam has also instituted a number of incentives 
designed to attract investment from foreign investors of 
Vietnamese origin.  They are allowed to choose to operate 
under domestic, as opposed to foreign, business licenses, 
although they may choose to operate as a foreign business 
where doing so would be advantageous to them.   The land 
law has also been amended to permit limited categories of 
these investors to buy land use rights to build homes, 
which other foreigners are not permitted to do.  However, 
the GVN often does not recognize the adopted nationality of 
many Vietnamese origin persons unless they have formally 
renounced their Vietnamese citizenship and may consider 
them to be Vietnamese nationals.  U.S. investors of 
Vietnamese origin should consult the U.S. Embassy in Hanoi 
or the U.S Consulate General in Ho Chi Minh City for more 
information. 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
A.6. Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
¶43.  Until the late-1980's, the Vietnamese economy was 
organized according to principles of socialist central 
planning.  Since then, the government has moved to develop 
a market-oriented economy and has formally recognized the 
existence of the private sector.  In recent years, the 
private sector, foreign and domestic and, to a lesser 
extent, a small collective sector have begun to play 
greater roles in the economy, although current policy 
dictates that the state sector will continue to "play a 
leading role" in the economy. 
 
¶44.  SOEs continue to dominate the industrial economy of 
Vietnam.  A large majority of these SOEs suffer from weak 
finances, high debt, obsolete plant and equipment, poor 
management, poorly trained staff, low labor productivity, 
and low product quality.   According to the World Bank, 
Vietnam has approximately 5,600 SOEs, down from around 
12,000 in the early 1990's.  At least 60 percent of the 
remaining SOEs are incurring losses, and some estimates 
indicate this number may even be higher. 
 
¶45.  As part of its 2001 economic reform agreement with the 
World Bank and the IMF, the GVN has committed to equitize 
roughly one-third of the current SOEs over three years and 
ensure that those remaining become competitive.  However, 
actual implementation of the reform program has been slower 
than planned.  In addition, many international observers 
expressed disappointment that the government did not agree 
to completely dismantle its SOE sector over time. 
Especially disconcerting to these observers is the Socio- 
economic strategy for 2001-2010 which reconfirms the 
"leading role" of the state enterprise sector and instructs 
the government to strengthen SOE operations in broad range 
of sectors which hold considerable interest for the 
international investor, including telecommunications, 
banking, insurance, petroleum and more. 
 
¶46.   A vibrant private sector is emerging in Vietnam. 
Dozens of large-scale Vietnamese private enterprises and 
tens of thousands small and medium sized firms now exist. 
The single most crucial GVN action in supporting of the 
development of the domestic private sector was the 
enactment, in January 2000, of the Enterprise Law, which 
provided, for the first time, simplified domestic business 
registration rather than discretionary government approval 
and licensing.  At the end of 1999, official statistics 
counted 28,000 companies in the formal domestic private 
sector.  Since, then almost 55,000 enterprises have been 
registered, the large majority of which are new 
enterprises.  The rest were previously existing firms that 
moved from the informal to the formal sector.   Also, as 
part of implementation of the new law, the GVN has moved to 
abolish nearly 200 "unnecessary" permits required by 
various ministries and localities for operation of a 
business.  Unfortunately, these agencies keep adding to the 
list of these "baby permits" in an effort to re-establish 
control over issues they previously influenced via the 
licensing system.   Domestic private enterprises have 
created substantial new employment in Vietnam, while 
employment in the state sector has been stagnant or 
declining. 
 
¶47.   Private firms, however, continue to be severely 
disadvantaged relative to SOEs in terms of access to credit 
and land, and in legal and regulatory treatment.  Private 
firms face restrictions in using land use rights for joint 
ventures with foreign investors.  SOEs also receive most of 
the lending from state-owned banks, which dominate the 
banking sector.  In general, despite these restrictions, 
the relatively larger private firms that are emerging in 
Vietnam operate with better management and greater 
efficiency than the SOEs.   Moreover, high-ranking 
government officials have stated the GVN's intention to put 
foreign and domestic investment on more or less even 
footing with SOEs with respect to access to credit, legal 
and regulatory treatment, pricing, and fees.  However, SOEs 
are likely to retain better access to land and will 
continue to be expected to "dominate" in key sectors as 
identified by the political leadership. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
A.7. Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶48.  The Vietnamese legal system is in a state of 
transition to support a more market-oriented economy and 
undergoes frequent and at times significant change.  The 
rudiments of a legal system that protects and facilitates 
property rights have been established.  But much more work 
needs to develop the laws and enforcement mechanisms needed 
to adequately protect property rights in Vietnam. 
 
¶49.  All land in Vietnam belongs to "the people", 
administered or managed by the State.  Private land use 
rights (LURs) were established for the first time in 1988. 
A LUR is a State-granted right to use land for a specific 
purpose.  The 1992 constitution granted stronger land 
rights to individuals, including rights over commercial and 
personal property.  LURs may be granted for up to 50 years, 
depending on the specific use of the land.  Individual 
holders of LURs can sell them if they move to a new 
location, change jobs, or are unable to work.  In 1998 
several changes to the land law were enacted, primarily to 
distinguish between corporate leaseholders, who can use 
their land for domestic or foreign joint ventures, and 
individual leaseholders who are not permitted to enter 
joint ventures with foreign entities.  In the 1993 land 
law, the National Assembly broadened LURs to include rights 
to exchange, transfer, rent, inherit, and mortgage land. 
Additional amendments to the land law in 2001 and 
subsequent implementing regulations decentralized authority 
for leasing land to businesses and permitted local 
officials to lease land to foreign organizations, 
individuals and overseas Vietnamese.  Still, foreign 
investors can currently only lease land from the Government 
or in industrial parks.  These limitations may soon be 
lifted.  The Government issued Resolution Number 2 in 
January 2003, proposing allowing domestic private companies 
with long-term land use rights to lease their land to 
foreign investors, provided that the lease is not longer 
than the rights held by the leaser.  The Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Environment has been tasked with 
formulating regulations to be issued in the second quarter 
of 2003. 
 
¶50.  Vietnamese LUR-holders have the right to mortgage 
them, but Vietnamese banks generally value land at a 
maximum of 70 percent of the total rent already paid on the 
property, not the property's appraised value.  As 
organizations only were obliged to begin paying rent in 
February 1995, the values of mortgages on land are not 
large, which limits their usefulness for property-based 
project finance.  The amended LFI permits foreign banks 
branches to accept mortgages of land use rights.  But to 
date, widespread use of collateralized bank loan actions 
have been hampered by a lack of central registration for 
mortgaged assets.  Foreign banks also want to see an 
amendment to the land law to permit them to take possession 
of the land after a foreclosure, and amendments to banking 
regulations.  In March 2002, a good first step was made 
when the New National Register for Secured Transactions 
opened for business in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.   But 
the registry does not have jurisdiction over land-use 
rights or buildings, assets that remain under the control 
of local authorities and the enforceability of collateral 
in the form of LUR and property remains uncertain. 
¶51.  Vietnam is a member of the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO) and is a signatory to the Paris 
Convention for Industrial Property.  It has acceded to the 
Patent Cooperation Treaty and the Madrid Agreement.  While 
not yet a party to the Berne Convention, Vietnam agreed 
under the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Copy Right agreement to 
provide U.S. copyrights protection on national treatment 
basis in accordance with the terms of that convention. 
Under the terms of the BTA, Vietnam is obligated, within 
two years, to make its system for protecting intellectual 
property rights (IPR), including enforcement, consistent 
with the WTO TRIPS agreement.  Considerable progress had 
been made over the past several years, with new regulations 
expanding legal protection to areas previously not covered, 
such as business secrets and new plant varieties, for 
example, protection of which were the subject of new 
regulations issued within the past 12 months. 
 
¶52.  However, in June 2003,  the GVN announced that it 
planned to change the way intellectual property rights are 
handled in Vietnam and as of this writing, the situation is 
in flux.  Previously trademark registration in Vietnam was 
relatively straightforward.  However, the GVN has proposed 
to remove responsibility for trademarks from the National 
Office of Industrial Property (Patents and Trademarks) and 
move just the registration function to the Ministry of 
Trade, although not the research or adjudication function. 
If the GVN implements the changes as planned, Vietnam may 
have a much more incoherent system of IPR protection, in 
particular,  trademark protection will be more difficult 
and foreign trademark holders, as well as domestic 
trademark holders, will be more vulnerable to infringement. 
IPR infringement continues to be widespread and enforcement 
of administrative orders and court decisions finding IPR 
infringement remains problematic.  Vietnam's laws offer 
some protection for foreign patent holders, but there are 
infringements.  Potential investors should contact the U.S. 
Embassy in Hanoi or the Consulate General in Ho Chi Minh 
City for the latest information regarding the ongoing 
changes  to IPR protection in Vietnam.  Obtaining 
expeditious adjudication and administrative enforcement of 
patent and trademark violations remains difficult and may 
get worse with the proposed changes.   Vietnam's copyright 
office is under the control and supervision of the Ministry 
of Culture and Information.  Significant progress has been 
made putting in place the laws protect copyrights including 
those belonging to foreigners but  enforcement is almost 
non-existent. 
 
¶53.  Enforcement of IPR remains weak and violations of IPR 
are rampant and may get worse under the proposed changes. 
While Vietnam recently has conducted considerable 
administrative and law enforcement actions against IPR 
violations, IPR enforcement remains the exception rather 
than the rule.  For some types of products, such as PC 
software, music and video CDs, VCDs and DVDs, as well as 
brand trademark violations, such as logos on t-shirts and 
other consumer items, IPR enforcement is virtually non- 
existent.  Industries estimates of piracy rates for 
software, music and video, run as high as 99 percent. 
Local police authorities often are slow to act on 
administrative orders finding infringement and court 
decisions.  Violators sometimes negotiate with plaintiffs, 
demanding payoffs to stop producing pirated material. 
However, there is the beginning of some progress with 
increased awareness of the need for effective IPR 
enforcement to foster investment, both foreign and 
domestic, in sectors such as software development and the 
arts.  In addition, Vietnamese authorities are becoming 
increasingly concerned that the proliferation of pirated 
products also undermines their ability to prevent the 
distribution of pornography and other illegal content. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
A8. Transparency of the Regulatory System 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶54.  As Vietnam undergoes a transition to a more market- 
oriented economy, the legal system is changed frequently, 
and at times, significantly.  Vietnamese officials have 
limited experience drafting legislation, and new laws and 
regulations sometimes are contradictory or unclear.  Not 
all officials, especially those at the provincial and local 
levels, are fully up-to-date on all the new laws and 
regulations which impact on their work.  Nor are all laws 
and regulations readily available to business and the 
public.  Different officials, sometimes within the same 
agency, may interpret laws differently.  There is a 
shortage of practicing lawyers, law-graduate judges, and 
law professors.  Substantial foreign assistance is being 
devoted to assist Vietnam to establish a legal structure 
compatible with international standards. 
¶55.  Although the Vietnamese government has begun to 
streamline and rationalize the investment licensing process 
over the past year, MPI and other national, provincial, and 
local government agencies retain a great deal of 
discretionary authority.  U.S. and other investors 
frequently encounter the need for further negotiation and 
administrative processes after the licensing process has 
been completed.  A general lack of transparency in law and 
regulation make it difficult not only to exercise rights, 
but to even be aware of what rules apply to an investment. 
In recent years, Vietnam has improved its process for 
making and publicizing laws, but beyond major national laws 
and regulations, much rule-making affecting foreign 
investors still occurs at the ministerial, sub-ministerial 
and local levels, without any regular process for public 
notification and little possibility for advance warning of 
changes in rules or for public input during the rule-making 
process. 
 
¶56.   Under the BTA, Vietnam is obligated to promptly 
publish all existing and future laws, regulations and 
administrative procedures which might affect any matter 
covered under the agreement including investment and trade 
in goods and services.  The BTA further commits Vietnam to 
enforce only laws, regulations or administrative practices 
that have been so published and to publicize such laws in 
sufficient advance of their effectiveness to ensure U.S. 
investors have adequate time to adjust their operations 
accordingly. Vietnam has committed to provide a process by 
which the U.S. Government and U.S. nationals have the 
ability to provide their views to the GVN on any such laws, 
regulations or administrative practices while they are 
still being formulated.  Finally, U.S. nationals have the 
right to appeal administrative action relating to matters 
relating to the agreement.  In December 2002, the National 
Assembly passed the "Law on Legal Normative Documents". 
Although this Law meets some of its BTA commitments, the 
GVN is not yet in full compliance with these obligations, 
in particular regarding prior notice and consultation on 
proposed regulatory and legal changes... 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
A.9. Efficient Capital Markets/Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶57.  Vietnam' financial system is in the early stages of 
reform and is not yet an efficient allocator of financial 
resources.  At least 50% of personal savings are held as 
cash, gold, or other assets outside the banking system. 
However, as part of its World Bank/IMF program, the GVN 
adopted a comprehensive banking reform program that relies 
on market-based action which is intended to ensure the 
stability of the banking system, and in the medium-to-long 
term, promote better mobilization of domestic resources by 
improving allocation of those resources to commercially 
viable activities, and expand banking services throughout 
Vietnam.  Raising capital for development is one of 
Vietnam's main economic priorities. 
 
¶58.  Foreign investors generally meet their foreign 
currency credit needs offshore or with foreign bank 
branches, although availability of foreign exchanges to 
convert dong assets to cover dollar liabilities can be, at 
times, uncertain.  Foreign banks are severely limited in 
their right to take dong deposits and frequently encounter 
difficulties meeting customer's dong cash and credit needs. 
However, under the BTA, U.S. banks now enjoy more a more 
liberal policy on dong deposits.   The State Bank and the 
Ministry of Finance have conducted sales of state bonds 
denominated in local currency, but Vietnam only has an 
informal secondary market for such instruments. 
 
¶59. The banking industry in Vietnam is characterized by its 
small size in terms of deposits and loans and by the 
relatively large number of banks, both foreign and 
domestic.  However, the four state-owned banks -- the 
Vietnam Bank of Foreign Trade (Vietcombank), the Vietnam 
Industrial and Commercial Bank (Incombank), the Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development, and the Vietnam 
Investment Bank -- still dominate domestic banking 
activity, providing an estimated 70 percent of all lending. 
Most local banks are under-capitalized, particularly when 
non-performing loans are taken into account.  Most are also 
weakened by state-directed lending under non-commercial 
criteria.  Furthermore, local banks, including the four 
state-owned banks, hold a large number of non-performing 
loans, mainly to SOEs.    IMF staff estimate that non- 
performing loans are roughly 30% of outstanding loans. 
 
¶60.  In 1997, the government introduced a new accounting 
standard, the 'Vietnamese accounting system.'  The Ministry 
of Finance continues to refine and amend this standard to 
bring it into consistency with international accounting 
standards.   After several years of grace period, foreign 
banks and companies are now required to comply fully with 
its parameters.  A number of major international accounting 
firms have opened offices in Vietnam and, unlike foreign 
law firms (which are subjected to restrictions including 
advising clients on Vietnamese law and hiring Vietnamese 
lawyers), can provide advice on accounting and business 
issues directly to foreign clients in Vietnam. 
Nonetheless, a continued lack of financial transparency and 
compliance with internationally accepted standards among 
Vietnamese firms continues to pose problems for the 
government's plan to expand stock and securities markets to 
raise capital internally. 
 
¶61.  Despite these challenges and after years of discussion 
and planning, Vietnam opened a stock market in July 2000. 
A total of 21 joint stock companies, primarily former SOE's 
now under a restructuring/equitization program, have listed 
on the exchange.  Several more are expected to do so soon, 
and before the end of the year, experts anticipate that 
there will be 20-25 listed companies. Under current market 
regulations, share prices of a listed company cannot 
increase or decrease by more than five percent per trading 
session.   To date, with its small trading volume, and 
restrictive rules on both listing and investor 
participation, the nascent market has yet to become a real 
source for financing or intermediation. 
 
¶62.  Foreign organizations and individuals can only hold a 
maximum of 30% of total shares issued by a listed company, 
of which a single foreign organization may hold a maximum 
of seven percent and a single foreign individual may hold a 
maximum of three percent.  MPI maintains a list of sectors 
and business lines in which foreigners may purchase shares 
in Vietnamese private enterprises in an effort to encourage 
private domestic enterprises to list and foreign investors 
to buy shares.   In April 2002, the latest version of this 
list was issued.  It includes selected commercial 
activities in five broad areas: agriculture, forestry and 
aquaculture; industry and processing; hotels and 
restaurants; transport, warehousing and communications; and 
science, technology, health care and education. 
 
¶63.  In March 2003, the Government issued Decision 36/QD- 
BKH revising the regulations on foreign shareholdings in 
Vietnamese companies, which are not listed on the Vietnam 
stock market.  The new Decision governs purchase of shares 
and capital contribution by the following foreign 
investors: 
 
?Foreign economic and financial organizations 
established pursuant to foreign law and conducting 
business overseas or in Vietnam; 
?Non-resident foreigners in Vietnam; 
?Foreigners who reside, earn their living and live 
long-term in Vietnam; 
?Overseas Vietnamese 
 
An important reform is that Prime Minister's approval is no 
longer required for the sale of shares to foreign 
investors.  However the maximum level of capital 
contribution and purchase of shares by any one or more 
foreign investor in Vietnamese companies is still capped at 
30% of the charter capital of the Vietnamese companies. 
 
 
¶64.  A handful of regional and Vietnam-specific investment 
funds were set up to invest in Vietnam following the 
lifting of the U.S. trade embargo in 1994, but their 
results have mostly been poor.  After promising beginnings 
in 1995, by 1998 shares in some of the funds were trading 
at an average discount of nearly 50 percent, and some were 
ere 
forced significantly to write down the value of their 
portfolios, while most failed to fully invest the funds 
raised for Vietnam due to a dearth of attractive 
opportunities.  The continuing lack of a developed stock 
market means funds do not have access to portfolio 
investment. 
----------------------------- 
A.10. Political Violence 
----------------------------- 
 
¶65. Vietnam is undertaking an ambitious course of 
transition both domestically and internationally, but 
remains essentially stable under the continued leadership 
of the CPV.  As the country proceeds with its transition 
from a centrally-directed economy to a more genuinely 
market-based economy, a process which began in the late 
1980's, the GVN and the CPV have, at the same time, reduced 
official interference in private lives of citizens and have 
permitted a broad expansion of personal liberties.  But the 
GVN remains a one-Party state that brooks no overt 
criticism of the GVN or CPV and continues to restrict 
freedoms of religion, speech, assembly, and press, while 
denying true choice of political system or leaders.  There 
are no signs of active opposition to the GVN or CPV, 
however, and most Vietnamese appear satisfied with the 
economic and social improvements of the last 16 years. 
There have nonetheless been isolated protests, such as 
large demonstrations by ethnic minorities in the Central 
Highlands in 2001 and smaller gatherings at the semi-annual 
meetings of the National Assembly by a variety of 
disaffected individuals. 
 
-------------------- 
A.11. Corruption 
-------------------- 
 
¶66.   U.S. and other foreign firms as well as domestic 
private sector firms,  have identified corruption in 
Vietnam in all phases of business operations as an obstacle 
to their business activities.  Vietnam scored a 2.4 out of 
a possible high score of 10 points on Transparency 
International's Corruption Perception Index behind 
neighbors Malaysia and Thailand but above Indonesia.  In 
large part due to a lack of transparency, accountability, 
and media freedom, widespread official corruption and 
inefficient bureaucracy remain serious problems that even 
the CPV and GVN admit they must address squarely and soon. 
Competition among government agencies for control over 
business and investments has created a confusion of 
overlapping jurisdictions and bureaucratic procedures and 
approvals which in turn create opportunities for 
corruption.  Low pay for government officials and woefully 
inadequate systems for holding officials accountable for 
their actions compound the problems.  Implementation the 
GVN's Public Administration Reform, developed in with the 
assistance of the World Bank, and the country's obligations 
under the transparency provisions of the BTA promise some 
improvement in the situation.  But it appears unlikely that 
they will be successful in this effort to eliminate 
corruption the near term. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
¶B. Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶67.  Vietnam has 45 bilateral investment agreements with 
the following countries and territories: Algeria, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium 
and Luxembourg, Bulgaria, Burma, Chile, China, Cuba, Czech 
Republic, Cambodia, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, 
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Italy, Laos, 
Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mongolia, Netherlands, North 
Korea, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Singapore, 
South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Tajikistan, 
Thailand, Ukraine, United Kingdom, and Uzbekistan. Vietnam 
has not concluded a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) with 
the U.S., but the BTA contains an investment chapter which 
closely resembles U.S. BITs and contains most of the 
principal obligations common to such agreements Vietnam 
also does not have bilateral taxation treaty with the U.S. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶C. OPIC and other investment insurance programs 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶68.  According to U.S. law, the Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC) may not operate in Vietnam until the 
President determines the country is in compliance with the 
emigration standards of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to the 
1974 Trade Act, or waives compliance as being in the 
national interest, and until OPIC certifies that Vietnam is 
making adequate progress toward protection of workers' 
rights.  In March 1998, the President executed a Jackson- 
Vanik waiver and OPIC and Vietnam signed a bilateral 
agreement to enable OPIC to begin operations in Vietnam. 
The waiver for Vietnam, and therefore continued 
availability of OPIC services to U.S. business in Vietnam, 
is subject to annual renewal and has been renewed each year 
since the waiver was first issued.  As of May 2003, OPIC 
had signed one active insurance contract in Vietnam.  OPIC 
is reviewing several applications to support other 
potential projects. 
 
¶69.  In the event OPIC should pay an inconvertibility claim 
in the future, the U.S.  Embassy estimates its total annual 
local currency disbursements to be approximately 51 
trillion Vietnamese dong (VND), or about US$ 3.3 million 
(June 2003). The exchange rate on June 20, 2002 stood at 
15,480 VND/USD.  The value of the Vietnamese dong 
depreciated 1.4 percent over the past year, and is expected 
to gradually depreciate at approximately the same or slower 
rate over the next year. 
 
¶70. Vietnam joined the Multilateral Investment Guarantee 
Agency (MIGA) in 1995. 
 
---------- 
¶D. Labor 
---------- 
 
¶71.  One of Vietnam's principal attractions for foreign 
investors has been its large, relatively well-educated (the 
GVN reports a literacy rate of over 90%), and inexpensive 
labor force.  Now estimated at nearly 40 million, the labor 
pool continues to increase by up to 1.5 million workers 
annually due to the post-war population explosion. 
 
¶72.  Despite its attractions, labor in Vietnam poses some 
problems for foreign investors.  There is a shortage of 
managerial talent and skilled workers, resulting in higher 
salaries for those employees.  Another factor raising the 
cost of skilled and managerial workers is Vietnam's sharply 
progressive personal income tax system, resulting in labor 
costs for relatively high-paid local staff to be 2-3 times 
higher than in other Asian countries.  One western manager 
estimated that if he wanted one of his engineers to receive 
a net salary of US$ 2,000 per month, the gross cost to his 
firm for wages, taxes, and benefits would exceed US$ 9,000 
per month.  In some cases, he said, it would be less 
expensive to employ an expatriate worker. 
 
¶73.  Under two 1999 directives, foreign organizations, 
including FIEs, must recruit and hire staff through state- 
owned employment bureaus, a requirement many investors find 
onerous.  Under amendments to the Labor Lawthat entered 
into force on January 1, 2003, FIEs  and foreign business 
cooperation parties are now allowed to directly recruit 
Vietnamese workers and foreigners.  However, the 
requirement to use such employment service agencies will 
continue to apply to branches and representative offices of 
foreign companies, foreign non-governmental organizations 
and foreign diplomatic missions. 
 
¶74.  Employers are required by law to establish labor 
unions within six months of establishment of the company. 
All labor unions must be members of the Vietnam General 
Confederation of Labor, an organization under the Communist 
Party-affiliated Fatherland Front.  There were, 79 labor 
strikes in 2002, that latest statistics available.  Strikes 
took place in SOEs, FIEs, and domestic private companies. 
There were no known strikes at U.S.-invested companies. 
Most of the strikes involved labor-management disputes over 
health, safety, or other working conditions, work hours, or 
late payment of wages, and were settled quickly. 
¶75.  Vietnam is a member of the International Labor 
Organization (ILO).  As of May 2003, it had ratified three 
of the eight core labor conventions: 100 (Equal 
Remuneration); 111 (Non-discrimination in Employment); and 
182 (Worst Forms of Child Labor).  Vietnam ratified the 
first two conventions on October 7, 1997 and the last on 
December 19, 2000.  Vietnam has not ratified ILO 
Conventions on freedom of association, protection of the 
right to organize and collective bargaining.  However, 
under the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights 
to Work, all ILO members, including Vietnam, have pledged 
to respect and promote all the core ILO labor standards, 
including those on association, right to organize and 
collective bargaining.  A number of technical assistance 
projects in the field of labor sponsored by foreign donors 
are underway in Vietnam, including work by the ILO and the 
U.S. Department of Labor. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
¶E. Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶76.  Companies may choose to produce within an export 
processing zone (EPZ) to take advantage of exemptions from 
customs duties for equipment, raw materials, and 
commodities imported into the zones, and for finished goods 
and products exported from the zones, subject to specific 
provisions regulating EPZs.  All of the production within 
an EPZ must be exported.  Industrial zones (IZs) have been 
developed to offer tax advantages for establishing 
factories within the zones.  Companies can produce within 
an IZ for the domestic market or for export.  The companies 
pay no duties when importing raw materials, if the end 
products are exported. 
 
¶77.  From the establishment of its first EPZ in 1991 through 
March 2003, Vietnam established a total of 73 IZs and 3 
EPZs.   As of March 2003, there were 1,253foreign invested 
enterprises licensed in the zones with a total registered 
capital of US$ 10.85 billion, of which over US$ 4.5 billion 
has been realized.Many foreign investors commented that it 
is faster and more convenient to implement their projects 
in the industrial zones than outside the zones as the land 
is already planned and they do not have to be involved in 
site clearance, compensation works and the construction of 
necessary infrastructure, which are time consuming and 
sometimes causes headaches. Foreign investment in the 
industrial zones currently concentrates on light industry 
projects, such as textile and garments, food processing. 
The number of projects in heavy industry is still modest. 
 
¶78.  The operation of customs warehouses was approved in 
¶1994.  There are bonded warehouses in Can Tho, Haiphong, Ho 
Chi Minh City, Mong Cai, Quang Ninh, Binh Duong, Dong Nai 
and Vung Tau.  Entities permitted to lease customs bonded 
warehouses are foreign enterprises, individuals, and 
overseas Vietnamese; Vietnamese import-export license 
companies; and FIEs licensed to perform import-export 
activities.  Most goods pending import and domestic goods 
pending export can be deposited in bonded warehouses under 
the supervision of the provincial customs office.  The 
exceptions are goods prohibited from import or export, 
Vietnamese-made goods with fraudulent trademarks or labels, 
goods of unknown origin, and goods dangerous or harmful to 
the public or environment. 
 
¶79.  The lease contract must be registered with the customs 
bond unit at least 24 hours prior to the arrival of goods 
at the port.  Documents required are a notarized copy of 
authorization of the holder to receive the goods, a 
notarized copy of the warehouse lease contract, the bill of 
lading, a certificate of origin, a packing list, and 
customs declaration forms.  Owners of the goods pay import 
or export tax when the goods are removed from the bonded 
warehouse. 
 
¶80.  Customs warehouse keepers can provide transportation 
services and act as distributors for the goods deposited. 
Additional services relating to customs declaration, 
appraisal, insurance, reprocessing or packaging require the 
approval of the provincial customs office.  In practice the 
level of service needs improvement.  The time involved for 
clearance and delivery can be lengthy and unpredictable. 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶F. Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Year   Capital     Number    Licensed       Actual 
     per project     of       capital       inflows 
    (million US$)  projects (billion US$) (billion US$) 
 
1992   10.5         193        2.027         0.478 
1993    9.5         272        2.588         0.871 
1994   10.3         362        3.746         1.936 
1995   16.4         404        6.607         2.363 
1996   23.5         367        8.640         2.923 
1997   14.0         333        4.659         3.137 
1998   15.0         260        3.897         2.364 
1999    5.2         298        1.568         2.179 
2000    5.8         344        2.014         2.228 
2001    5.3         461        2.521         2.300 
2002   1.97         697        1.376          N/A 
 
Note:  Authorities have been steadily adjusting the final 
figures for investment inflows for recent years upwards. 
It is not clear whether these adjustments reflect 
additional information that has become available to 
investment authorities or if they reflect an attempt to 
make the investment downturn in the wake of the Asian 
financial crisis appear less severe. 
 
The licensed capital statistics for 1997 and 1998 may be 
unrealistic.  A Singapore-invested resort complex in 1997 
worth US$700 million is unlikely to be completed in the 
foreseeable future, and the Russian partner has recently 
pulled out of a joint venture petroleum refinery project 
licensed in 1998 worth US$ 1.3 billion.  Absent these 
projects, the decline in newly licensed FDI after 1996 
would appear to have been even sharper. 
 
 
Total FDI (as of  04/20/2003): 
 
-- licensed projects:   3,897 (US$ 38.892 billion) 
lion) 
-- disbursed capital: US$ 21.815 billion 
(56 percent of licensed capital) 
 
Note:  GVN authorities routinely revise or revoke 
investment licenses which have not been utilized and other 
investment licenses contain automatic expiration clauses 
that take effect if a project or certain phases of a 
project are not implemented by a certain date.   Statistics 
on the number of licensed projects and the value of 
licensed projects are then adjusted accordingly. 
 
Foreign direct investment in selected sectors (cumulative): 
(as of 04/20/2003) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sector             number of  licensed capital  implemented 
                   projects    (billion US$)      capital 
                                               (billion US$) 
¶1. General Industry  2,329         16.30           8.83 
¶2. Oil & gas            31          1.94           3.35 
¶3. Construction        255          3.43           1.96 
¶4. Real estate devel   104          3.42           1.61 
¶5. Hotels & Tourism    135          3.23           2.01 
¶6. transp/commun.      110          2.58           1.00 
¶7. Ag & forestry       412          2.40           1.33 
¶8. Fisheries            85           250           0.12 
¶9. Finance & banking    47          0.61           0.54 
¶10. Health & Education 133          0.64           0.22 
 
Foreign direct investment by country (2002): 
 
   Country               number of        licensed 
                         projects          capital 
                                        (million US$) 
¶1. South Korea              137              248 
¶2. Taiwan                   173              247 
¶3. Hong Kong                 53              143 
¶4. United States             32              139 
¶5. Japan                     42               90 
¶6. Malaysia                  25               70 
¶7. British Virgin Islands    31               63 
¶8. China                     50               60 
¶9. West Indies                1               50 
¶10. Thailand                 13               40 
 
 
Foreign Direct Investment by country: 
(cumulative, as of 4/20/2003) 
 
Country        number of   licensed       of which 
               projects    capital     invested to date 
                        (billion US$)   (billion US$) 
 
¶1.  Singapore     276        7.35           2.78 
¶2.  Taiwan        980        5.38           2.44 
¶3.  Japan         384        4.35           3.46 
¶4.  South Korea   536        3.78           2.19 
¶5.  Hong Kong     276        2.97           1.78 
¶6.  France        127        2.08           0.86 
¶7.  Brit.Virg.Isl 166        1.83           1.02 
¶8.  Netherlands    47        1.70           1.27 
¶9.  Thailand      112        1.38           0.58 
10.United Kingdom  46        1.18           1.06 
¶11. Malaysia      125        1.14           1.20 
12.United States  163        1.13           0.56 
¶13. Switzerland    23        0.63           0.52 
 
There is little data available on Vietnam's direct 
investment abroad.  According to the Ministry of Planning 
and Investment, as of April 2003, Vietnamese businesses had 
invested in 78 projects worth about US$ 187.3 million in 
Russia, Singapore, Laos, Japan, Hong Kong, Cambodia, 
Tajikistan, the Middle East, the United States, Uzbekistan, 
 the Middle East, the United States, Uzbekistan, 
and Taiwan.  These investments were concentrated in the 
following sectors:  transport, communications, 
construction, food processing, oil and gas, hotel, 
restaurant, and agriculture sectors.  Vietnamese businesses 
have two investment projects worth US$260,000 in the United 
States. One Vietnamese government-owned telecommunications 
firm established an office in California.  There are no 
Vietnamese government regulations on investment overseas. 
 
Note:  Statistics, including those on investment, are often 
difficult to come by and are generally based on definitions 
that differ from internationally-accepted standards.  Those 
published in government statistical surveys are generally 
incomplete and often inconsistent from publication to 
publication and over time.  It is the policy of the 
Ministry of Planning and Investment to respond only to 
written requests for statistics or information on how they 
are compiled and calculated, a process that is cumbersome 
and very time consuming.  Additional statistical data is 
often released in the local press but is difficult to 
confirm and update year-to-year, because it is not also 
provided in a database, which is readily available to the 
public. 
 
3.End text of the 2003 Investment Climate Statement for 
Vietnam. 
BURGHARDT