This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001730 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/24/2013 
TAGS: PREL LI NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIAN FOREIGN MINISTER ON TAYLOR 
 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1654 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1630 
     ¶C. SECTO 13 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY CDA ROGER MEECE FOR REASONS 1.5 (b) AND (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) CDA took the opportunity of a meeting with Foreign 
Minister Adeniji October 7 to express appreciation for 
Nigeria's leadership efforts on Liberia and Guinea-Bissau, 
but also to express continuing concern over Charles Taylor's 
interference in Liberian affairs.  Noting the GON's interest 
in sharing information about Taylor, CDA previewed 
Washington's awareness and acknowledged that we were working 
the issue. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Adeniji replied that it was almost impossible to 
believe that Taylor would have no influence on a Blah 
government that was almost a continuation of Taylor's, but 
Nigeria expected that would change with the new Bryant 
government from October 10.  Adeniji listed the following 
factors: 
 
 
-- Although Taylor's party would remain in the government, 
Bryant would not permit them to play a role out of tune with 
the other members of the government; 
 
 
-- "For good or bad," UNSYG Representative Klein would also 
work to show that Taylor had no influence in the new 
government; 
 
 
-- LURD and MODEL members of the government, as well as civil 
society members, would keep Taylor's influence minimal; 
 
 
-- ECOWAS Representative Aboubakar (now in Liberia) would 
keep engaged for the foreseeable future; and 
 
 
-- Nigeria's Ambassador to Liberia has been instructed to 
work specifically on this in concert with the American 
Embassy there. 
 
 
In short, Adeniji continued, Taylor's influence would wane no 
matter what he did as the new government took control, and 
Nigeria would keep a tight leash on him as well.  He had 
already been rebuked publicly by the GON when he strayed 
close to the line of acceptable behavior (Ref B).  Adeniji 
added that it was essential that the U.S. remain fully 
engaged, in Liberia and at the UNSC, for the ECOWAS/UN effort 
to succeed. 
 
 
¶3. (C) CDA expressed appreciation for the Minister's 
comments, noting that Ambassador Blaney in Monrovia was in 
contact with Klein and the Nigerian Ambassador, and that we 
were continuing to work with all levels of the GON here.  CDA 
asked if the Taylor crossed the line Adeniji had mentioned, 
would the GON consider turning him over to the Sierra Leone 
Special Court.  Adeniji replied with vigor that the such a 
proposal should not be made to President Obasanjo.  "In the 
future," Adeniji continued, "Taylor's moving on might come 
up, but please do not mention sending him to any judicial 
body now." 
 
 
---------------- 
C-130s, Training 
---------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Adeniji mentioned that he had requested USG assistance 
on spare parts for Nigeria's C-130s and on training 
additional Nigerian army battalions (Ref C).  Now that the 
Secretary "had conceded the point," Adeniji hoped there would 
 
SIPDIS 
be urgent follow up.  Nigeria wants to use its C-130s to 
supply its peacekeepers in Liberia, and soon the DRC, and 
needs to train additional battalions to take the place on 
rotation of the trained battalions now deployed.  CDA noted 
that vagaries of the Congress and Continuing Resolution made 
this complicated, but we would do our best. 
ROBERTS