This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001253 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT. FOR PM, INL/LP, WHA/PPC, WHA/CEN, AND DRL/PHD 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN AND OFDA 
SAN JOSE FOR OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS SNAR PREL PGOV PHUM EAID KCRM HO
SUBJECT: JOINT TASK FORCE BRAVO - U.S. MILITARY PRESENCE IN 
HONDURAS APPLAUDED AND CRITICIZED 
 
REF: 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2444 
 
¶1. (U)  SUMMARY:  Since 1982 the U.S. military has maintained 
a presence at the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) airbase at 
Soto Cano (commonly known by Hondurans as Palmerola).  The 
base is also the site of the Honduran Air Force Academy. 
Currently, Joint Task Force Bravo (JTF-B) houses more than 
600 U.S. troops and employs more than 700 Hondurans.  Through 
salaries, contracts, tourism and donations, JTF-B contributes 
approximately USD 30 million annually to the Honduran 
economy.  The initial mission of JTF-B was to deter 
aggression from the Nicaraguan National Sandinista Liberation 
Front (FSLN).  Today, U.S. forces train the HOAF; conduct 
bilateral operations in counternarcotics; and provide 
humanitarian assistance, medical emergencies, and disaster 
relief.  JTF-B is also a first responder for natural disaster 
crises for the entire Central American region.  Now some 20 
years later, with the threat of communism gone, some 
Hondurans continue to question the validity of the U.S. 
presence at Soto Cano.  END SUMMARY 
 
------------------------ 
U.S. PRESENCE BENEFICIAL 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Since 1982 the U.S. military has maintained a 
presence at the Honduran Armed Forces (HOAF) airbase at Soto 
Cano (commonly known by Hondurans as Palmerola).  For the 
HOAF, the base, also the site of the Honduran Air Force 
Academy, represents a strategic relationship with the U.S. 
military.  With the U.S. Southern Command departure from 
Panama in 1999, JTF-B now serves as the principal military 
presence for the U.S. in Central America.  JTF-B is the first 
responder to crises in the region, and supports 
counternarcotics and counterterrorism missions when directed 
from Southern Command.  Moreover, it conducts and supports 
recovery and evacuation operations in all of the Central 
American (CENTAM) region.  Additionally, the task force 
maintains and jointly operates the only C-5 capable airfield 
base in the region.  It provides support for joint combined 
exercises and unit training, theater deployable surgical 
team, all-source intelligence, an operational footprint for 
immediate reaction forces, and maintains pre-positioned 
stocks for theater-wide military operations.  Secondarily, 
JTF-Bravo conducts and supports humanitarian civic assistance 
and military civic action operations, and supports USAID 
disaster relief programs. 
 
--------------------------- 
HONDURAN PERSPECTIVE VARIES 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Hondurans find themselves sitting on both sides of 
the fence in regards to the U.S. presence at Soto Cano.  On 
the one hand, many recognize the strategic bilateral 
relationship that is maintained between the two countries. 
The training and operation resources provided to the HOAF are 
also recognizably important beneficial aspects of the base. 
Furthermore, the more than USD 30 million in economic 
activity generated by the base makes a direct and significant 
economic impact on the surrounding Comayagua Valley.  On the 
other hand, Honduran critics of the base voice several 
concerns over the JTF-B mission.  First, some knee-jerk 
critics say that the U.S. uses the base more for selfish 
unilateral motives rather than with the intention of helping 
the HOAF and the people of CENTAM in general.  This view 
unfortunately also generates the belief that the U.S. should 
provide Honduras with greater monetary compensation for use 
of the land, above and beyond the rent the USG currently 
pays.  Another criticism is over JTF-B's missions.  The 
Committee of Families of the Detained and Disappeared in 
Honduras (COFADEH), a Honduran NGO that focuses on alleged 
human rights abuses from the 1980s and is skeptical of a U.S. 
military role in Honduras, recently criticized JTF-B for 
possible violations of Honduran sovereignty in 
counternarcotics operations.  Often, this type of criticism 
reflects a lack of knowledge of what the base does.  PolOff 
met May 19 with Bertha Oliva de Nativi, the COFADEH General 
Coordinator, to answer her questions and allay her concerns. 
PolOff emphasized that JTF-B undertakes all actions working 
in cooperation with the GOH and referred her to the Ministry 
of Defense if she had more questions about Soto Cano.  PolOff 
is also providing Oliva with public relations information 
from JTF-B. 
 
------------------- 
COMMERCIAL AIRPORT? 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (U)  In August of 2002, President Ricardo Maduro announced 
that he was considering the possibility of converting the 
airstrip at Soto Cano for use by commercial airlines. 
Currently, the small size of the Toncontin airport in 
Tegucigalpa severely limits the type of aircraft that can 
safely land there (reftel).  This primarily affects cargo 
planes used for exportation of Honduran products.  A joint 
commercial-military airport at Soto Cano could mean greater 
commercialization and revenue possibilities for Comayagua and 
the surrounding area, especially for the development of 
textile factories (maquilas).  However, such a project would 
necessitate very careful planning so as not to compromise the 
security and safety of military operations that currently 
take place at the base.  To date, no official plans for a 
civilian airport project have been developed. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  COMMENT:  While a small minority of outspoken 
critics question the motive of a U.S. military presence in 
Honduras, many understand the benefits of having JTF-B 
stationed at Soto Cano.  JTF-B was instrumental in providing 
disaster relief in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch, and 
continues to provide tangible benefits to the host country 
through medical visits and other humanitarian missions.  The 
GOH is also grateful for the monetary contribution JTF-B 
provides to the domestic economy and the stabilizing effect a 
U.S. military presence provides to regional security.  END 
COMMENT. 
Pierce