This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 005442 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2013 
TAGS: AM CY ECON PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR EDELMAN'S INITIAL CALL ON TURKISH 
PRESIDENT SEZER 
 
REF: ANKARA 5419 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman; E.O. 12958, 
reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  During Ambassador Edelman's initial call on 
Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer August 25, Sezer 
asserted the importance of the U.S.-Turkey relationship, 
raised Iraq, and commented on Cyprus' EU accession and 
Armenian genocide claims.  The Ambassador stressed the 
importance of good U.S.-Turkey communication on Iraq, urged 
resolution of Cyprus before May 2004, and encouraged Turkey 
to open the border with Armenia.  End Summary. 
 
 
U.S.-Turkey Relations, Iraq 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador Edelman presented his credentials to 
Turkish President Sezer on August 29, within ten days of 
arrival at post.  Sezer opened the one-on-one discussion by 
raising the importance of the U.S.-Turkey relationship, 
saying that the U.S. and Turkey had been good allies for a 
long time.  Sezer acknowledged recent bilateral differences 
but said that these were matters that could be resolved 
between democratic allies. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Ambassador noted recent incidents in northern Iraq 
(reftel) and said that U.S. forces were working to restore 
calm and prevent ethnic violence between Kurds, Turkomen and 
Arabs.  U.S. forces had detained some of those responsible 
for firing shots and investigation of the incidents was 
continuing.  There had been good bilateral communication on 
these issues and it was important that this continue.  The 
Ambassador noted that Turkey had sent delegations to Iraq and 
said he was pleased that they had met with CPA Administrator 
Ambassador Bremer.  Sezer did not respond, and did not 
comment on the issue of potential Turkish contributions to 
Iraq stabilization. 
 
 
Cyprus and Armenia 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Sezer said that the EU should not have proceeded with 
Cyprus accession absent a settlement.  Moreover, Denktas had 
undertaken confidence-building measures and there had been no 
response from the Greek Cypriot side.  The Ambassador replied 
that it was important to look forward to settlement on Cyprus 
before Cyprus' accession in May 2004 and the May 2004 NATO 
Summit in Istanbul.  The Ambassador added that December 2003 
elections in Northern Cyprus would be an important milestone, 
it was important that they be free and fair, and we hoped 
that Turkey would use its influence to that end.  Sezer 
offered no comment. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Sezer referred to "Armenian genocide claims" coming 
up periodically in the U.S. Congress.  The Ambassador replied 
that the Vice President and Secretary Powell had personally 
been involved when the last bill came up, but added that this 
was becoming more difficult to manage the longer 
Turkish-Armenian differences remained unresolved.  Ongoing 
discussions between the Turkish and Armenian foreign 
ministries were helpful and opening the border would help 
manage the Armenian issue.  Sezer did not respond directly, 
but instead in passing mentioned the importance of the 
upcoming U.S.-Turkish Economic Partnership Council (EPC) 
meeting and QIZs. 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Comment:  For an initial call, Sezer spent 
considerable time stressing the bilateral relationship's 
importance.  Otherwise, the meeting was vintage Sezer: 
little substance, and offering nothing that would move 
forward resolution of outstanding issues.  In press 
reporting, President Sezer is quoted as saying that 
Ambassador Edelman's comments on Iraq echoed the words of 
President Bush when the two presidents spoke after the Bingol 
earthquake.  End Comment. 
 
 
¶7.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
EDELMAN