This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 COLOMBO 000831 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR D, INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (FOR JWALLER); SA.PD (FOR LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, 
WREINCKENS); SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  Assistant Secretary Christina Rocca 
May 11-14 Sri Lanka Visit 
 
¶1.  Summary:   The media received Assistant Secretary 
Christina Rocca's May 11-14 visit to Sri Lanka positively 
and interpreted her visit as further indication of 
international support for the Island's peace process. 
English, Sinhala and Tamil television coverage of Rocca's 
visit was extensive.  Major English and vernacular 
newspapers headlined her remarks regarding cohabitation and 
encouraging the LTTE to attend the Tokyo donor conference. 
English editorial comment was muted and focused on 
cohabitation and sovereignty issues.  Tamil editorial 
reaction was more robust and for the most part agreed with 
Ms. Rocca's comments regarding cohabitation.  Sinhala 
editorialists remained silent. 
A transcript of Rocca's May 13 Colombo press conference was 
picked up by the Washington File, and was also distributed 
to the English and vernacular Sri Lankan press.  In India, 
the transcript was distributed to Tamil Nadu media outlets. 
India's English Sun-TV and Tamil channels carried clips of 
Ms. Rocca's briefing.   End summary. 
 
----- 
¶2.  Television. 
----- 
 
English, Sinhala and Tamil television coverage of Rocca's 
visit was extensive. Independent and government-owned 
television stations heralded both her arrival on May 11 and 
her meetings with the President, Prime Minister and the 
Foreign Minister on May 12.   On May 13, post hosted a 
press conference for Rocca, which was aired by independent 
and government-owned television stations on lunchtime and 
evening newscasts in and English and vernacular broadcasts. 
 
Indian English Sun-TV and Indian Tamil channels carried 
clips of Ms. Rocca's briefing. 
 
 ----- 
¶3.  Headlines. 
------ 
Throughout Rocca's visit, major English and vernacular 
newspapers focused on her comments regarding cohabitation 
and the LTTE's attendance at the Tokyo donor conference. 
Independent English DAILY MIRROR headlined (5/15), "US 
tells UNF and PA to come together." Government -owned 
English DAILY NEWS wrote (5/14), "Act in unity to achieve 
peace - Rocca," and (5/15), "Rocca lauds Lankan peace 
process: US urges LTTE to go to Tokyo." Opposition Sinhala 
daily, DIVAINA led with (5/14), " `In order to make the 
peace process happen, all political parties get together' 
announces America."  Independent Tamil VIRAKESARI reported 
(5/15), "'LTTE should definitely attend the Tokyo 
Conference- Cohabitation between President and Prime 
Minister necessary' - says Christina Rocca." 
 
Regarding her 5/12 meeting with President Kumaratunga, 
independent English DAILY MIRROR (5/14) reported, "CBK 
complains to US against LTTE and govt. " This was echoed by 
opposition Sinhala daily DIVAINA (5/15), "Christina Rocca 
is informed of MOU violations of LTTE. "  The Tamil press 
was predictably silent. 
 
----- 
¶4.  English editorials. 
----- 
English editorial comment was muted and focused on 
cohabitation and sovereignty issues. 
---- Under the headline, "The spirit of Vesak and the 
spirit of the constitution," opposition English daily 
ISLAND (5/15) warned, ".foreign donors .consider co- 
habitation quarrels will eclipse peace negotiations." 
Excerpts: 
"While Sri Lankans and the world outside hoped that some 
form of compromise could be reached between the prime 
minister and president over an issue that is not as 
contentious as many other issues before them, the 
president's resounding reply (my decision remains unchanged 
and valid) has dashed hopes of a settlement and deepened 
the political crisis. 
"At yesterday's press briefing by America's key official to 
the South Asian region, Assistant Secretary of State 
Christina Rocca, she spoke of two challenges that are 
particularly worrying: `One the possibility that the LTTE 
may ignore the donor conference in Tokyo; two the 
possibility that cohabitation quarrels will eclipse peace 
talk deliberations'. The reference made to is quite obvious 
and if the president pursues with her intended moves it 
could well lead to paralysis of government, dissolution of 
parliament and threaten the `Peace Process'. 
"Despite President Kumaratunga's cavalier dismissal of 
charges of jeopardising the `Peace Process', as pointed out 
earlier in our comments, foreign donors do consider co- 
habitation quarrels will eclipse peace negotiations. Indeed 
even before the lotteries board issue, there were far 
greater co- habitation issues that had to be resolved if 
peace was to come about. But if this seemingly less 
innocuous issue is to take us further down into the mire, 
it will probably take this `Peace Process' along with it." 
 
---- Under the headline, "Erosion of sovereignty," 
independent English DAILY MIRROR commented (5/16), "But for 
our head of state. to obsequiously place her domestic 
problems before a visiting representative of another 
sovereign state, is .tantamount not only to putting the 
country's sovereignty to ridicule but to bringing disgrace 
to the honour and dignity of the office she holds." 
Excerpts: 
 
"The extent of the erosion of our country's sovereignty 
could be judged from the fact that it has become necessary 
for our head of state to complain to an outsider against 
the government's alleged harassment of her party activists 
and supporters and about other domestic problems. 
"The President has lodged this complaint about the LTTE's 
ceasefire violations and about 3,000 incidents of assault, 
arson and battery against PA activists and supporters 
following the December 2001 general election and regarding 
police inaction over these incidents, when US Assistant 
Secretary of State Christina Rocca met the President on 
 
SIPDIS 
Tuesday. 
"It would indeed be a different matter if these parties 
took their woes and disputes to international institutions 
specifically set up for the resolution of such conflicts. 
But for our head of state who wields extensive executive 
powers, to obsequiously place her domestic problems before 
a visiting representative of another sovereign state, is 
certainly tantamount not only to putting the country's 
sovereignty to ridicule but to bringing disgrace to the 
honour and dignity of the office she holds." 
----- 
¶4.  Vernacular editorials. 
----- 
Tamil editorial comment was more robust.  For the most 
part, Tamil editorials incorporated Ms. Rocca's remarks 
into their own editorial messages, encouraging the 
government to overcome its cohabitation problems.  Sinhala 
editorialists remained silent. 
 
 
---- Under the headline, "Christina Rocca's timely 
expressions,"  independent Tamil daily, THINAKKURAL 
commented (5/15) that "...The government, opposition, 
President and the Liberation Tigers should take note of the 
views expressed by . Rocca at a time when the peace process 
is facing many challenges."  Excerpts: 
 
 
"...The government, opposition, President and the 
Liberation Tigers should take note of the views expressed 
by the US Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian 
Affairs Christina Rocca at a time when the peace process is 
facing many challenges. 
 
"Tiger participation at the Tokyo Aid Conference is 
uncertain. At the same time a new political crisis between 
the President and the Prime Minister has emerged. 
 
"These two issues may bring an end to national peace. The 
political forces should get together and put an end to such 
disputes. 
 
"Christina Rocca has said that it is important that the 
political forces apply the correct approach and settle 
these two issues if Sri Lanka is to prosper in the future 
within a peaceful environment. All those trying to show 
their muzzles should bear this in mind." 
 
 
---- Under the headline, "Disputes and Aid," Independent 
Tamil daily, VIRAKESARI (5/16) echoed Rocca's comments and 
wrote: "If all these parties fail to raise a common voice 
the full quota of the anticipated aid may not reach Sri 
Lanka."  Excerpts: 
 
 
"American voice is again heard that Sri Lanka should take 
care of the peace talks to achieve lasting peace. The US 
Assistant Secretary of State for South Asia Ms. Christina 
Rocca has made this comment. 
 
"Her voice at this stage, when the talks are faced with 
many obstacles, is a request to the President, Prime 
Minister and the Tigers to pay attention and proceed in the 
right direction. ... 
"... While commenting that the recent actions of the 
President and the use of her executive powers are connected 
to internal affairs of Sri Lanka, she said that the 
international community is very much interested regarding 
solution to the Sri Lankan ethnic problem and lasting peace 
in Sri Lanka. 
 
"The US government has always said that the participation 
of the President at the peace talks is very vital. This has 
been stressed this time too. She has stressed that the 
President and the Prime minister should solve the disputes 
between them amicably and should work together to find a 
solution to the ethnic problem. 
 
"The Aid Conference to be held in Tokyo, Japan in June is 
very important to the government, President, Tigers and the 
citizens of Sri Lanka. If all these parties fail to raise a 
common voice the full quota of the anticipated aid may not 
reach Sri Lanka." 
 
 
 ---- Under the headline, "Executive powers that challenge 
cohabitation," Independent Tamil daily, THINAKKURAL 
comments (5/16), "The chances of bringing a solution to 
this problem is far away."  Excerpts: 
 
 
"The government sources, international facilitators and the 
local political forces working for peace are trying their 
level best to solve the political crisis between Liberation 
Tigers and the Sri Lankan government enabling the Tigers to 
continue with peace talks and attend the Tokyo Aid 
Conference. The chances of bringing a solution to this 
problem is far away. 
 
US Assistant Secretary for South Asia Christina Rocca 
clearly said "should not allow the peace talks with 
Liberation Tigers to break up and that is the advice the US 
government can offer" 
 
 
---- Under the headline, "A good omen," independent Tamil 
daily, SUDAR OLI commented (5/16): Finally [the US] has 
understood that whenever the government wants to fulfill 
the aspirations of the Tamils the racists in the opposition 
always try to stop such a move."  Excerpts: 
 
"Although many of them are customary statements as the 
international policeman, one of here views show that the US 
has understood something they refused to understand in the 
past. 
 
"The ethnic problem in Sri Lanka has along history of more 
than five decades. During that period many Tamil leaders 
wanted to find solutions for their problems in a peaceful 
manner. But every time they tried to win the rights of the 
Tamil people, the Sinhalese leaders who were in power 
fooled them." 
 
"When the Tamil people became convinced that their demands 
could not be won through peaceful negotiations, they had to 
start an armed struggle." 
 
"All this time, the US government did not understand or 
rather did not want to understand the basic reasons for the 
armed struggle of the Tamils. Finally they have understood 
that whenever the government wants to fulfill the 
aspirations of the Tamils the racists in the opposition 
always try to stop such a move." 
 
"... Therefore she has warned the President and the Prime 
Minister not to allow the peace talks to break off." 
 
Wills