This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 001283 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/09/2013 
TAGS: PTER KHDP ASEC PGOV YM
SUBJECT: ADEN EXPLOSION APPEARS ACCIDENTAL 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Alan G. Misenheimer for Reason 1.5 (b, 
d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary and Comment:  There are conflicting reports 
on the facts behind an explosion in Aden on June 7 that 
killed three Yemeni men.  However, the most credible account 
of the incident from DAO staff visiting in Aden, with 
corroborating facts from other sources, point to an 
accidental explosion.  Differing accounts of incidents like 
this one are not unusual in Yemen because the lines of 
responsibility (and therefore the most accurate description 
of facts) among ROYG elements are not always clear.  Post 
will continue to investigate the incident to ensure no 
relation to terrorism.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Members of the DAO who were in Aden heard the 
explosion at around 12:30am on June 7 and followed up with 
the Political Security Organization (PSO) and other local 
contacts to ascertain the circumstances.  They were told that 
three scrap-metal scalvagers recovered a unconfirmed type of 
missile, possibly a small surface-to-air missile, and were 
attempting to remove the metal when the missile detonated. 
The three, from the same family, were killed instantly.  The 
incident reportedly happened in a scrap metal yard owned by 
the family in the Little Aden area. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The area around Aden contains numerous known 
minefields that are undergoing clearance through the U.S. and 
UNDP-supported ROYG National Mine Action Committee, but there 
are still areas that contain unexploded ordinance (UXO) 
outside these well-marked areas.  DAO members have observed 
old missile scraps lying along the route from Aden to Little 
Aden. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Local independent newspaper al-Ayyam printed the 
names of the three dead.  ORCA conducted a name-check as a 
precaution and came up empty. 
 
¶5.  (C)  In another version, Ministry of Interior (MOI) 
contacts told RSO that three men found an old Rocket 
Propelled Granade (RPG) launcher, took it home and tried to 
take it apart when it blew.  Other accounts of the facts from 
various sources, including United Nations officials and the 
international and Yemeni press, differ in the details.  Some 
accounts mention a missile and some mention an RPG, while 
some accounts mention different locations in Aden. 
MISENHEIMER