This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 001137 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
CAIRO FOR POL - MAXSTADT 
STATE PASS TO DEPT OF EDUCATION FOR SECRETARY PAIGE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM OVIP NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: PRESIDENTIAL DELEGATION AT THE 
INAUGURATION 
 
 ¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Against the backdrop of significant 
opposition criticism of the April 19 elections and vague 
threats of &mass action8 against the new Administration, 
President Obasanjo held a triumphal inaugural on May 29. 
Security was tight but the events of inauguration week were 
well organized and peaceful.  Because of the bruised feelings 
of the opposition, this inauguration fell short of the near 
universal euphoria experienced in 1999.  Yet, overall it was 
celebratory.  The official USG delegation led by Secretary of 
Education Rod Paige was well received by the GON.  The 
delegation attended all key events including the inaugural 
ceremony and subsequent gala dinner.  The delegation also met 
President Obasanjo the day after his inauguration.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
RIGHT ON TIME FOR THE MAIN EVENT 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) After stormy weather delayed the Presidential 
delegation,s arrival in Abuja by a day, the delegation 
arrived the morning of May 29, just in time to motorcade from 
the airport to Eagle Square to witness the actual 
inauguration ceremony.  Basically an asphalt lot with 
bleachers on three sides, Eagle Square was well decorated and 
colorful.  Over 28 Africa Heads of State (including 
Cameroonian President Paul Biya, who entered the square to 
loud applause), the U.K. Deputy Prime Minister, other 
high-level official delegations, the People,s Democratic 
Party national and state hierarchies, famous personalities 
and numerous strap-hangers.  On the other end of the social 
spectrum, and on the other side of the Eagle Square fence, 
were literally thousands of Nigerian onlookers who were 
curious but uninvited guests.  Interspersed among the invited 
guests were some of Abuja,s most accomplished touts and 
pickpockets, wanting to put their agile hands into the 
pockets of some of Nigeria,s wealthiest as they passed 
through the main pedestrian entrance. 
 
 
¶3. (U) The inaugural ceremony lasted approximately two hours. 
 The Vice President, Atiku Abubakar, was sworn in first. 
This had a bit of a comic element as Vice President Atiku 
pointedly corrected the Chief Justice after the latter 
inverted the Vice President,s name when administering the 
oath. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Chief Justice Uwais had no trouble with President 
Obasanjo,s name.  After being sworn in, Obasanjo delivered 
his inaugural address.  Due to a poor sound system, the 
address was inaudible to most of the attendees.  The event 
took place with no demonstrations or violence of any kind. 
After the swearing-in, Secretary Paige and his delegation 
lunched with the Archbishop of Abuja, Dr. John Onaiyekan, who 
led a discussion of the HIV/AIDS problem in Nigeria.  Joining 
the Archbishop, representatives of Catholic Relief Services 
briefed the delegation about their HIV/AIDS program and 
USAID-sponsored operations. 
 
 
¶5. (U) The evening featured the Inaugural Gala and Banquet, 
with cultural dances, music, a sampling of Nigerian cuisine, 
and lots of comic relief.  During and after the meal, 
numerous prominent Nigerians (including former Head of State 
Shagari) and several Heads of State gave toasts in honor of 
President Obasanjo.  Thabo Mbeki of South Africa and Joachim 
Chissano of Mozambique paid tribute to Obasanjo and 
emphasized the importance of Nigeria to Africa,s political 
future and economic development. 
 
 
--------------------- 
MEETING WITH OBASANJO 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (U) Obasanjo,s schedule was hectic throughout the 
inaugural week.  Not only did it include inaugural events and 
planning, Obasanjo also hosted a NEPAD Summit and bilateral 
meetings with many visiting Heads of State.  Nevertheless, he 
made it a point to carve out time in his schedule to meet 
Secretary Paige and the delegation.  That meeting came on 
 
SIPDIS 
Friday, the morning after the inauguration.  Originally, 
Secretary Paige was to meet President Obasanjo after the 
 
SIPDIS 
President,s daily 6 a.m. prayer session.  Because this was 
the first morning prayer after the inauguration, it lasted 
longer than expected.  In the end, the delegation was asked 
to join the President and his inner circle in prayer, where 
requests for divine guidance and blessings for the two 
countries and their people featured prominantly.  After the 
meeting, the delegation exchanged courtesies and gifts with 
the President, then departed for the airport and the long 
flight home. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Despite the criticism of the elections and the 
threats to disrupt the inauguration, inaugural week passed 
without incident.  Security was heavy and there were no 
protests or violence.  Also Obasanjo made an astute political 
move.  Holding the NEPAD Summit ensured the attendance of 
over a score of African Heads of State.  This not only added 
legitimacy to the inauguration, it also may have lessened the 
inclination to protest, given the overwhelming security 
presence to shelter the visiting Heads of State. 
 
 
¶8. (U) The American official delegation and the unofficial 
Congressional Black Caucus delegation were well received. 
The warm reception denoted the continued goodwill in Nigeria 
for America and the determination of the new Obasanjo 
Administration to strengthen the bilateral relationship. 
JETER