This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/ARP, S/WCI 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/02/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PINR KU
SUBJECT: (C) MINISTER SHARAR URGES ACTION ON GUANTANAMO 
DETAINEES 
 
Classified By: AMB. RICHARD H. JONES; REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs and 
National Assembly Affairs Sharar told the Ambassador August 2 
that Kuwaitis look to the US to ensure due process for 
Guantanamo detainees (which include 12 Kuwaitis).  They 
discussed the GOK's prospects for cooperation with the 
newly-elected National Assembly, the issue of the "bidoon" 
(stateless persons living in Kuwait), and the situation in 
the region.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) The Ambassador called on Minister of State for 
Cabinet Affairs and National Assembly Affairs Mohammed 
Dhayfallah al-Sharar August 2, as part of his round of 
courtesy calls on members of the new Cabinet formed July 15. 
Pol Chief sat in as notetaker.  The meeting was conducted 
entirely in Arabic. 
 
(C) COOPERATION WITH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
-------------------------------------- 
¶3.  (C) After congratulating Sharar on his reappointment (he 
held the same posts in the last Cabinet), the Ambassador 
asked for his assessment of the new National Assembly elected 
July 5.  Sharar said the results show the people want 
tangible results instead of "grillings" of Ministers and 
similar grandstanding.  He noted the increase in Independents 
at the expense of "parties," whether Islamic Constitutional 
Movement or liberals. 
 
¶4.  (C) Sharar said the GOK was preparing a sort of roadmap 
that it would present to the National Assembly in October, 
showing priorities, timelines, costs, and any needed 
legislation.  He mentioned the issue of the "bidoon" 
(stateless persons in Kuwait), saying it needs to be 
addressed in a balanced way, not necessarily by granting 
citizenship.  In his view, the bidoon, whose number he 
estimated at 40,000, know they are better off in Kuwait with 
their present ambiguous status than they would be in their 
countries of origin:  Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iraq and Iran.  He 
added that some 26,000 bidoon "got their passports" in the 
past four years. 
 
(C) GUANTANAMO DETAINEES 
------------------------ 
¶5.  (C) Referring to the planned September visit to 
Washington by Prime Minister Shaykh Sabah, Sharar said 
Kuwait's alliance with the US is fundamental and needs 
continual high-level dialogue.  He then raised the issue of 
Kuwaiti detainees at Guantanamo, saying Kuwaiti citizens keep 
asking what US policy is.  He stated that a great country 
should ensure due process and dispose of cases fairly.  In 
response to his question, the Ambassador said he did not have 
any new information to share, but was aware that the GOK 
Ambassador in Washington had discussed the issue with US 
officials.  He noted that we have released some detainees 
after deciding they were innocent, and highlighted the 
potentially disastrous consequences of releasing unreformed 
killers.  The Ambassador added that the USG was still 
developing its position on possible bilateral agreements 
under which detainees might be repatriated. 
 
(C) IRAQ AND THE REGION 
----------------------- 
¶6.  (C) Sharar asked how things were going in Iraq.  The 
Ambassador replied that public services are improving slowly, 
and the death of Uday and Qusay has made the population more 
willing to help us.  Bechtel had begun work, and had 
contracts with Kuwaiti firms.  Sharar replied that Kuwaitis 
feel their country should have a leading role in rebuilding 
Iraq.  They applaud the elimination of Saddam's regime, which 
posed a danger to the world, and hope to hear news of his 
capture or death.  Sharar assessed that tension had lessened 
a great deal between Kuwaitis and Iraqis, who are bound by 
historical ties.  The two countries have mutual interests, 
especially in the economic realm.  He said there were plans 
for a free trade zone on the border, and perhaps for a 
Kuwaiti trade exhibition in Baghdad.  Iraqi businesspeople 
were buying goods in Kuwait for sale in Iraq, and the GOK was 
facilitating their movements.  The Ambassador suggested that 
if they consolidated their shipments, it would enable them to 
share the cost of necessary security for their trucks. 
 
¶7.  (C) In reply to Sharar's question, the Ambassador said he 
was optimistic about the future of the region overall.  He 
noted the serious efforts to achieve an Israeli-Palestinian 
agreement.  The Minister responded approvingly that this is 
"the main cause" of Arab disaffection with the US.  Resolving 
that conflict would lead to positive changes in Syria and 
Lebanon as well, he added.  He laughed in agreement when the 
Ambassador observed that America has two kinds of critics in 
the Arab World: those who believe we intervene too much and 
those who don't think we intervene enough. 
 
¶8.  (C) On Iran, Sharar said he has seen many changes there 
over the years since the Islamic revolution.  The population 
is tired of the mullahs' rule and wants a more open society. 
The Ambassador noted the benefits of separating religion and 
state.  Sharar replied "that's a point of view," before 
declaring that persons of all faiths enjoyed freedom under 
Islamic rule as practiced by the "rightly guided caliphs." 
JONES