This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 005381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, IIP/G/NEA-SA, 
INR/BWHITE 
HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICELONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR 
O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PACINCCENT FOR CCPAUS 
DOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, NOVEMBER 20-23: ISTANBUL 
BOMBINGS; PRESIDENT BUSH IN UK; WORLD JERUSALEM DAY; JANE 
FONDA AND WOMEN'S RIGHTS 
 
REF: KUWAIT 05317 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: All media report condemnation by Kuwait's 
Council of Ministers of the November 20 bombings in 
Istanbul, although editorial commentary has not yet caught 
up with the event during this late-Ramadan period in Kuwait. 
In regard to the November 15 attack against a synagogue in 
Turkey, one Islamist writes churlishly that "despite the 
Jews' aggressive and ill-mannered nature. we condemn the 
attacks in Turkey." 
 
One writer links the protests in London surrounding 
President Bush's visit to "hatred of American's policy of 
suppression," but little else on the POTUS speech in London 
has appeared.  The occasion of World Jerusalem Day this week 
inspired one or two formulaic denunciations of Israel and 
Zionism. 
 
A high-ranking Ministry of Education official denies that 
female students were expelled on November 18 for not wearing 
the headscarf (reftel), but rather for not wearing the 
"school uniform," adding that "we cannot force women to wear 
the headscarf." A prominent liberal writer calls the 
expulsions "intellectual terrorism." 
 
On the news pages, Al-Watan published an interview with Jane 
Fonda in which she reportedly stated her willingness to come 
to Kuwait "if Kuwaiti women needed her support" in their 
efforts to secure political rights. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News stories: All papers report a strong condemnation of 
the November 21 blasts in Istanbul at the British Consulate 
and HSBC Bank by Kuwait's Council of Ministers (Cabinet). 
 
Six NGOs issued a statement denouncing the expulsion of 
schoolgirls for not wearing headscarves, first reported in 
local media on November 18(reftel), as "an act in violation 
of the values of tolerance and freedom," Al-Qabas reports. 
 
On November 24, all newspapers report that Assistant 
Undersecretary for Education Dr. Hamoud Al-Sadoon stated 
that the students were not expelled for failing to wear the 
headscarf, but rather for not wearing the "school uniform." 
He added, "We cannot force women to wear the headscarf." 
 
Al-Qabas reports that Kuwaiti security forces were placed on 
alert on November 20 after receiving information of a group 
of terrorists intending to infiltrate into Kuwait to carry 
out attacks. 
 
Al-Qabas reports that Islamist MP Waleed Al-Tabtabei 
attacked Kuwaiti secularists by accusing them of 
"Westernizing women under the pretext of liberating them," 
in an interview with a Qatari newspaper. He added that 
Islamists in the National Assembly support women's rights, 
but are against "the exploitation of women." 
 
In an interview with Al-Watan newspaper, actress Jane Fonda 
urges Kuwaiti women to continue their efforts to obtain 
their political rights, adding she is willing to come to 
Kuwait if Kuwaiti women need her support. 
 
Islamist MP Dr. Hassan Jowhar stated during the First Annual 
Jerusalem Conference in Kuwait, "It is a joke to say that 
America is a broker of peace" between Israel and the 
Palestinians. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Bush at World Jerusalem Day" 
Shiite former MP Abdelmohsen Jamal wrote in independent Al- 
Qabas (11/22):  "The visit of President Bush to Britain 
coincided with World Jerusalem Day, the anniversary which 
Iranian President Khomaini called for prior to his death. 
While we witnessed demonstrations against Bush in Britain, 
other demonstrations were also taking place to condemn the 
Zionist entity. Bush's visit to Britain has revealed the 
extent of the hatred held by many people toward the policy 
of suppression by the US administration." 
¶4. "Intellectual Terrorism" 
Liberal Director of the Center for Future and Strategic 
Studies at Kuwait University, Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in 
independent Al-Seyassah (11/24):  "There is a link between 
the expulsion of the unveiled schoolgirls and terrorism in 
the Gulf region. What happened in Kuwait is intellectual 
terrorism and what took place in Saudi Arabia is terrorism 
and violence. However, intellectual terrorism is the most 
dangerous type of terrorism practiced by political 
Islamists. What happened in Kuwait is clear proof that 
religious groups opposed to pluralism and tolerance dominate 
the Ministry of Education." 
 
¶5.  "Jerusalem Day:  It is Time for People to Speak Out" 
Amna Al-Mussawi wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (11/21): 
"[World Jerusalem Day] has become the only hope for Arabs to 
express their opinions towards Jerusalem. Israel's efforts 
to obliterate the Palestinian cause could not occur without 
full American support for the Zionist State." 
 
¶6.  "Why Did They Triumph Over Arabs?" 
Islamist Salafi Dr. Wael Al-Hassawi wrote in independent Al- 
Rai Al-Aam (11/20):  "In spite of the Jews' aggressive and 
ill-mannered nature. they have dominated the world's economy 
and media, making them the most effective lobby in the 
Western world. In spite of this, crimes committed against 
synagogues in Arab and Islamic countries are unjustified and 
therefore we condemn the attacks in Turkey." 
 
¶7.  "Anti-Semitism" 
Adnan Zaid Al-Kazemi wrote in independent Al-Watan (11/23): 
"Zionism has strived to use the term `anti-Semitism' against 
those who oppose its ideology. [T]he recent polls conducted 
in Europe [reflecting a belief by some that Israel is the 
greatest threat to world peace] were a slap in the face for 
America and its bastard child, Zionism.   To call someone 
anti-Semitic is the same as calling someone anti-Zionist, 
and no one accepts these accusations any longer." 
 
URBANCIC