This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003905 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION ON MIDDLE EAST 
 
                        Summary 
 
-- Lead story in all papers today, June 30, is the 
visit to the region of U.S. National Security Advisor 
Rice.  Reports also highlight the agreed "truce" of 
Palestinian militant groups and the Israeli withdrawal 
from Gaza.  Papers also highlight a "new American 
military offensive" against continued "resistance" in 
Iraq. 
 
                 Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "Condoleezza Rice: she might succeed where men have 
failed" 
 
Daily columnist Sultan Hattab writes on the op-ed page 
of semi-official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai 
(06/30):  "By signing a joint document declaring the 
truce and handing it to the Palestinian government, 
the Palestinian factions have taken a correct step 
towards supporting Palestinian legitimacy.  They have 
provided this government with an opportunity to 
present the Palestinian cause once more in a light 
that would win the world's understanding for the 
urgency of finding a political solution that would 
enable the Palestinian people to restore their rights 
and establish their state.  This agreement saves Abu 
Mazen's government, first and foremost, but also 
protects the Palestinian factions, whom Israel wants 
to see disagree so that it can pursue them and kill 
their leaders..  The United States seems now to be 
more interested in the roadmap, in removing all 
obstacles that stand in its way, particularly Israeli 
obstacles, and in implementing the agreement with 
equality and balance.  This is clear from Ms. Rice's 
visit to the region and her successful meeting with 
Mahmoud Abbas." 
 
-- "Washington's objection to building the dividing 
wall: the beginning of a practical stand" 
 
Semi-official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai (06/30) 
editorializes:  "Reports leaked by the Israeli media 
about the heated discussion between Advisor 
Condoleezza Rice and the Sharon government show a 
relatively more understanding American position 
towards the nature of the Palestinian-Israeli 
conflict..  Washington's stand now indicates America's 
seriousness to handle the conflict in accordance with 
the roadmap, which seems to be the final opportunity 
to salvage the peace process." 
GNEHM