This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 001118 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL YE DOMESTIC POLITICS
SUBJECT: BAATHIST PARTY ANIMAL RETURNS TO YEMEN 
 
 
Classified By: DCM ALAN G. MISENHEIMER FOR REASON 1.5 (D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1. (C)  Qassem Salam, the Secretary General of Yemen's Arab 
Socialist Baath Party slunk back from Baghdad in late April. 
In a May 6 interview with a London Arab paper, he claimed 
ROYG President Salih had recently praised Saddam Hussein as a 
"brave struggler".  The MFA declares a complete mis-quote, 
and insists Salam is headed for the political sunset. End 
Summary 
 
-------------------------- 
YEMENI BAATHIST COMES HOME 
-------------------------- 
¶2. U) In a meeting on other subjects (reported septel), the 
DCM queried Abul al-Saleem al-Awadhi, MFA Director of the 
Americas Desk, about statements made by Qassem Salam, 
secretary-general of Yemen's Arab Socialist Baath Party (the 
 
SIPDIS 
Iraqi,as opposed to Syrian, wing of the party).  Qassem 
Salam, who was resident in Iraq, fled Baghdad on April 12. 
 
¶3. (U) Salam's May 6 interview with London's Al-Arab 
al-Alamiyah  gained some local and international media 
attention when he claimed knowledge that Saddam Hussein was 
still alive, preparing to organize "tough, decisive, 
historic" resistance to coalition forces, 
 
¶4. (U) While these delusions may be Salam's last gasp at 
attention, he also referred to a meeting he had with ROYG 
President Ali Abdullah Salih after returning from Baghdad. 
Salam claimed that President Salih was, Quote: pained by what 
happened...and stressed his conviction that Saddam Hussain 
was a brave and generous struggler...however, like any other 
leader, he had his mistakes and positive points. End Quote. 
 
----------------------- 
NOT BRAVE, NOT GENEROUS 
------------------------ 
¶5. (C)  When the DCM asked for clarification of these 
remarks, al-Awadhi quickly responded that they were 
inaccurate.  President Salih had not praised Saddam Hussain, 
although he may well be pained by the situation of the Iraqi 
people. Qassem Salam had misinterpreted his words.  In 
addition, the President had received Qassem Salam only as the 
Secretary General of a registered political party that was 
 
SIPDIS 
fielding candidates in Yemen's approaching parliamentary 
elections. 
 
¶5. (C) The DCM pointed out that the presidential meeting had 
given Salam both prestige and opportunities for mischief, 
al-Awadhi assured him that it was unlikely to be repeated. 
The Iraqi wing of the Baath Socialist party had not won a 
single seat in the elections, and Salam would soon fade away. 
 After a short nostalgic review of the Baath Party's long ago 
days of intellectual respectability under party founder 
Michel Aflaq, Al Awadhi reiterated his point: President Salih 
is not at all "pained" by the fate of Saddam Hussain. 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶6.  (c) Qassem Salam is a fading figure, and his quotes 
regarding President Salih's views on Saddam's moral character 
were never credible.  Nevertheless, we believe it was 
worthwhile to remind the ROYG that the USG will be paying 
attention to the fate of the (never terribly relevant) Iraqi 
Baath Party in Yemen.  We predict Qassem Salam will not be 
meeting again soon with President Salih or finding a 
political spotlight in Yemen. 
HULL