This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 005962 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL MOPS MARR TU IZ
SUBJECT: NORTHERN IRAQ: NEXT STEPS WITH TURKEY ON PKK/KADEK 
- GETTING AT THE LEADERSHIP 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 261988 
     ¶B. ANKARA 5919 (NODIS) 
     ¶C. ANKARA 5745 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman.  Reasons 1.5 b and d. 
Recommendation at Para 1. 
 
 
¶1. (S) As we prepare for S/CT Black's visit and the next 
round of talks with Turkey on the PKK/KADEK presence in Iraq, 
Post believes we need to take into account a number of the 
Turkish positions expressed to DAS Pascoe on Sept. 12 (Ref 
B).  RECOMMENDATION: To demonstrate the seriousness of the US 
commitment, even before military COAs are developed, we 
recommend Washington consider the following possible steps 
that we could share with the Turks as evidence of our intent 
to actively make good on our commitment to eliminate the 
PKK/KADEK from northern Iraq in the short-term: 
 
 
-- issue to US military units in the region names and photos 
of the top 32 PKK/KADEK leaders with instructions that they 
be apprehended if sighted (possibly with a rewards program 
for information leading to their capture).  We should widely 
publicize the names of the top 32 we will be looking for; 
 
 
-- track the movement of these leaders so that if there is a 
gathering of several or more of them that we learn of in 
advance, we could consider a "decapitation strike;" 
 
 
-- immediately develop and implement a psyops campaign 
focused on the PKK/KADEK leadership in Iraq (including in the 
Makhmour Camp) but conveyed to rank and file elements as well 
with a firm message that the window for peaceful surrender is 
rapidly closing, that the US and Turkey are of one purpose in 
our commitment to end the threat to Turkey posed by the 
PKK/KADEK presence in Iraq, and that we urge them to turn 
themselves in now or face the very real possibility of 
military action against them in the near future; 
-- immediately hold talks with UNHCR on how to separate out 
the PKK/KADEK elements from the rest of the Makhmour camp 
population and relocate those individuals while ensuring they 
have no access to the camp population.  The camp population 
would also need to have visible and credible security to 
protect them from reprisals should they opt to return to 
Turkey; and 
 
 
-- take diplomatic/law enforcement steps in cooperation with 
the GOT to seek the arrest and extradition to Turkey of 
PKK/KADEK leaders located in countries other than Iraq and 
the estimated 5 PKK/KADEK operatives said to be working in 
the US. 
 
 
¶2. (S) The Turkish press and Turkish officials have given the 
Sept. 12 talks mixed reviews, with some voices saying an 
action plan had been agreed and others that the US is still 
doing nothing.  Turks also continue to tie US action against 
PKK/KADEK to the possibility of Turkey contributing troops to 
a stabilization force.  We look forward to S/CT's visit and 
hope we can move forward as aggressively and decisively as 
possible against this terrorist organization for the good of 
Iraq, Turkey and the US. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN