This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 000141 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA (PLEASE PASS TO DAS LIZ CHENEY); IIP/G/NEA/SA; 
NEA/PPD; CHARLOTTE BEERS OFFICE (R); PATRICIA HARRISON AND 
RICK RUTH(ECA) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL KPAO OIIP JO
SUBJECT: ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR THE AMMAN ARABIC BOOK 
PROGRAM 
 
REF: CAIRO 11622 
 
¶1.  Summary:  PAS Amman supports PAS Cairo's request for 
increased funding, and seeks an additional USD 65,000 
supplement for Amman's Arabic Book Program.  Funds will be 
used to encourage greater initiative on the part of 
publishers and to expand program capacity to publish books 
in support of MEPI and Partnership for Learning initiatives. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.   Funding Requests: 
 
¶A.  USD 10,000 for a pilot program to purchase translation 
rights for books pre-selected by Jordanian publishers for 
publication. 
 
---Justification:  Post currently selects books that meet 
Arabic Book Program criteria, secures rights, and awards 
publication to the winning bid from qualified publishers. 
While this process continues to serve our needs, it does 
limit the number of books translated.  Regional publishers 
are, for the most part, inexperienced in the international 
publishing arena and hesitant to initiate book purchases on 
their own.  The pilot project would make available to 
regional publishers modest funds for purchasing translation 
rights to books desired by the publisher and approved by the 
ABP, provided that publishers undertake the negotiation 
process on their own.  Obtaining rights and publishing these 
titles would encourage these publishers to obtain valuable 
experience in contacting American publishers and requesting 
translations rights, negotiating deals, selecting 
forthcoming titles, and closing foreign rights contracts on 
their own in future.  If successful, the pilot project would 
raise publishers' confidence levels and result in increased 
numbers of American titles published in the region.  Post 
expects to facilitate publishers' initial efforts in 
international negotiation, through short-term training or 
other hands on assistance. 
 
¶B. USD 20,000 for expansion of core "American Studies" 
titles. 
 
---Justification:  Post wishes to encourage interest in 
American Studies, and to complement Cairo's proposed youth 
literature program, with an expanded list of literary, 
historical and political writings suitable for the 
university audience.  Titles would be chosen in consultation 
with current Fulbright American Studies and Literature 
professors and with other experts in the field.  Translation 
of these titles would make American literature, history and 
political thought more accessible to readers whose English 
reading ability is less than perfect.  Based on our 
observations, many students who are registered in English 
literature courses have difficulty with the material and 
would benefit from having quality Arabic translations ready 
to hand for comparison.  Students who might be hesitant to 
sign up for an American Studies course with reading 
materials entirely in English would feel more comfortable if 
the material was also available in an Arabic version. 
 
Last year's 3-volume collection of American Studies 
materials enjoyed tremendous popularity with both students 
and the literary elite. Amman ABP is presently publishing 
Howard Zinn's "A People's History of the US", and John 
Updike's edition of "The Best American Short Stories of the 
Century". "Emerson's Essays" was published earlier this 
year, and Gordon Wood's "The American Revolution" has been 
assigned for next year.  The requested funds would allow 
publication of an additional 4-6 American Studies titles in 
the coming year. 
 
¶C. USD 15,000 for translation and publication of recent 
American titles on religious freedom, tolerance, and mutual 
understanding. 
---Justification:  Many new titles on religious freedom, 
faith and tolerance, and shared values between Islam and the 
West have been published in the US in the wake of September 
¶11. Making the best of these titles available to Arabic 
readers will reinforce understanding of the depth of 
America's commitment to religious tolerance, religious 
freedom, and inclusivity.  Funding is requested for 
approximately four titles. 
 
¶D.  USD 20,000 for translation and publication of titles 
dealing with good governance and civil society. 
 
---Justification:  The issues of democracy, good governance, 
and citizen participation are in the forefront of Arab 
intellectual discussions these days; furthering these 
objectives is of key interest to the US.  There are 
currently very few Arabic translations in this area, very 
little original authorship, and only a few fledgling 
programs at educational institutions and at grassroots 
levels.  Post seeks to support nascent institutional efforts 
as well as provide the Arab literary and intellectual 
opinion leaders with easily accessible and stimulating 
materials that will enhance understanding of these issues 
and raise the level of discussion by inspiring a more 
international outlook in both oral and printed discussions. 
Funding is requested for 5-6 titles in this area.  Gnehm