This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002507 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2012 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: ORAL MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY REGARDING 
4/18 RIYADH MEETING ON IRAQ 
 
REF: SECSTATE 97844 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador W. R. Pearson.  Reason:1.5(b)(d). 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (C) Ambassador called on MFA Undersecretaries Baki Ilkin 
and Ali Tuygan April 17 to deliver reftel message to the GOT 
regarding the April 18 meeting on Iraq in Riyadh, noting our 
concern that Syria may try to hijack the proceedings.  Tuygan 
said Turkey would work for moderation.  They also discussed 
Turkey's interest in helping with humanitarian assistance, in 
reconstruction and the possibility it would want to 
contribute to a stabilization force.  End summary. 
 
 
-------------- 
Riyadh Meeting 
-------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) Tuygan noted he will go to Riyadh with F.M. Gul, who 
was invited by the Saudis; the Saudis explained that the 
meeting would "take stock of events in Iraq and try to find 
common ground" for the next stage in developments there. He 
offered that most of the participants, including Syria and 
Iran, will try using the meeting to send a strong message to 
the U.S.  Other attendees will push for cooperation with the 
USG while highlighting "local sensitivities, which are 
exacting a high price,"  Tuygan said.  "We need to say 
something to our publics," he added.  Both Tuygan and Ilkin 
stated that Turkey will do what it can to promote moderation 
at the meeting, noting that "this is not the time not to 
cooperate" with the USG. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Tuygan raised two points which, he said, are likely to 
be on the agenda in Riyadh: (1) the Middle East peace 
process, in which Turkey wants to play a constructive role; 
and (2) Syria's draft UNSC resolution regarding a WMD-free 
zone -- an idea Damascus pushed at the early March meeting of 
regional FoMins in Istanbul.  On both these fronts, the 
Saudis will be key to setting a moderate tone; "we've seen 
too many (regional) meetings," Tuygan said, "dominated by the 
radicals."   He and Ilkin doubted whether a positive 
post-meeting statement would be possible. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ambassador reiterated that the USG is aware of the 
possible Syrian approach in Riyadh, noting that, given 
Syria's own WMD programs and refusal to sign various WMD 
treaties, Damascus is not in a strong position to push its 
draft resolution.  He also acknowledged that the Saudi role 
at the meeting is key  -- and that the USG is not asking 
Turkey to "shoulder any special burdens." 
 
 
------------ 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
 
¶5. (C) Ambassador noted that the Turkish Red Crescent 
(Kizilay) has publicly criticized the U.S. for a perceived 
failure to facilitate its humanitarian mission in Iraq. 
Ambassador noted that Kizilay's objectives in Iraq are 
commendable, but its anxiety is misplaced.  Kizilay needs to 
above all to coordinate its activities with the ICRC. 
Moreover, the U.S. simply does not have the manpower to 
supply security to Kizilay convoys.  Ambassador urged MFA to 
encourage Kizilay to actively seek out ways to participate in 
the ICRC framework.  Tuygan then noted Turkey's interest in 
bringing injured civilians to Turkey for treatment in Turkish 
hospitals, and asked whether it was possible for Turkey to 
obtain permission from Kuwait for access to Kuwaiti airspace 
and airports.  Ambassador commended the GOT for its interest, 
noting the crush of identical requests from other countries. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Ambassador noted we had been told that Turkey was 
preparing to offer resources for stabilization of Iraq. 
Tuygan said that the GOT has reacted favorably to the idea, 
though it has not discussed the issue in detail and the 
modalities and other arrangements would need to be clarified 
first.  Tuygan expressed concern lest any such force 
apportion different segments of Iraq to different ethnic 
groups, noting GOT is particularly disappointed at statements 
by Barzani and Talabani, which imply to the Turks that the 
Kurds are interested in asserting independent control over 
the north.  He claimed that: (1) some 3,000 Kurdish families 
have recently moved into Kirkuk; and (2) that the Peshmergas 
are taking control of abandoned weapons, including tanks, and 
have not in fact left the city. 
¶7. (7) Ambassador noted these concerns.  He also stated that 
information coming to the USG -- which has a wealth of 
resources on the ground -- paints a completely different 
picture of the situation: there is, in fact, no Kurdish 
takeover of Kirkuk; the Kirkuk-Yumurtalik oil pipeline will 
soon open under U.S. control.  The Ambassador emphasized that 
the USG is operating in complete good faith in Iraq; that we 
have read the riot act to Barzani and Talabani regarding the 
need for them to do the same; and that something must be done 
to bridge the knowledge gap between rumor in Turkey and what 
we know as the actual state of things in the region.  Tuygan 
took the point, expressing interest in greater U.S.-Turkey 
intelligence coordination.  He noted that the GOT fully 
accepts that the USG is showing good faith, but noted that 
"there always will be an element of suspicion" regarding the 
activities of the Iraqi Kurds; Tuygan said that the GOT was 
pleased with the outcome of the recent meeting between Iraqi 
Turkoman representatives and General Osman. 
 
 
¶8. (C) Tuygan and Ilkin expressed interest in participating 
in reconstruction efforts, and to be kept informed as to 
developments along these lines. Ambassador replied that we 
will encourage Gen. Garner to meet with the Turkish 
Ambassador in Kuwait.  He noted that the Embassy in Ankara 
routinely supplies information about opportunities there to 
Turkish companies, who are free to place bids with prime 
contractors. 
PEARSON