This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000979 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR D (Gastright), INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC, SA (Camp, 
Waller), SA/PD (Brennig, Irwin, Scenscy), SSA/PAB, 
SSO (pass to D) Tokyo (Hara, Bryan) 
 
E.O. 12356: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE LTTE
SUBJECT: MEDIA PLAY   Subject:  Media Play (June 6):  Tokyo 
conference; Colombo. 
 
¶1. Summary.  As the Tokyo conference approaches, the media 
scene grows dyspeptic.  "Ways to solve [the] dispute ... can 
be found," the Prime Minister is reported to argue, but 
others speak of racists, i.e., Sinhalese nationalists, who 
want the LTTE to miss Tokyo, while voices closer to the LTTE 
blame the impasse on the GSL.  An editorial in the LTTE- 
leaning SUDAR OLI is even more brutal and an article in the 
LTTE's web site says that the "political bankruptcy of the 
Sri Lankan state in solving the ethnic conflict never stood 
so well exposed."  End summary. 
 
----- 
¶2. Headlines 
----- 
 
In the moments prior to his departure for Tokyo Prime 
Minister Wickremasinghe spoke pro-peace once again.  His 
comments resonate in the English and vernacular press.  The 
DAILY MIRROR (independent English daily) says "PM insists no 
more war" and "fervent plea for world community to help 
build peace process in Sri Lanka."  The ISLAND (independent 
but nationalist-leaning English daily) agrees:  "Ways to 
solve dispute over interim admin. can be found - PM." 
THINAKKURAL (independent Tamil daily) quotes the PM as 
seeing "not much of difference between the government and 
LTTE regarding the Interim Administrative Council."  And 
VIRAKESARI (independent Tamil daily) weighs in with 
"International countries are interested in peace efforts, no 
chance for talking of war again - Tokyo Conference a great 
support for the peace efforts - Prime Minister Ranil 
Wickremasinghe." 
 
Unfortunately, the PM's cheerleading is accompanied by 
catcalls.  DIVAINA (independent but nationalist-leaning 
Sinhala daily) reports simply that "Tigers say NO...." 
DINAMINA (government-owned Sinhala daily) says that "Racists 
[i.e., Sinhalese nationalists) are in favor of LTTE's 
absence at the Confab."  And SUDAR OLI (independent but LTTE- 
leaning Tamil daily) has LTTE leader S. P. Tamilselvan 
blaming the impasse on the GSL:  "The Sri Lankan government 
should take responsibility for non-participation of Tigers 
at the Tokyo Conference, Tamilselvan informs UNHCR 
Official." 
 
----- 
¶3. Editorials 
----- 
 
Under the headline "Tokyo conference and Liberation Tigers" 
SUDAR OLI (independent but LTTE-leaning Tamil daily) blames 
the GSL for creating the impasse by rejecting an interim 
administration that would "give the Tigers more muscle."  It 
may be true, SUDAR OLI says, that "the Tigers could have 
bargained for more aid had they attended the Tokyo 
Conference.  But if there is no proper structure to utilize 
the funds received -- however much is received -- what is 
the use? 
 
Block quotes. 
 
The Tokyo Conference attended by Donor Countries will be 
held in two days and the chances of Tiger participation ... 
are very remote.  Anton Balasingham's reply to Prime 
Minister Ranil Wickremasinghe and the recent statement made 
by Tamilselvan to British, Dutch, and Swiss diplomats show 
that the chances of Tiger participation at the conference 
are very remote. 
 
There wouldn't be a problem if the government would 
establish an Interim Administrative Council that would give 
the Tigers more muscle to pursue reconstruction, 
resettlement, and rehabilitation in the north and east.  ... 
to bring normality back to the peninsula.  Then the Tigers 
would attend the Tokyo Conference, and the peace talks too, 
would resume. 
 
But the government is not ready to establish an Interim 
Administration.  Anton Balasingham has pointed out that the 
Councils in the government's proposals will be powerless, 
like SIHRN is, and are unacceptable.  Tamilselvan has also 
informed the diplomats who visited Vanni to pressurize the 
Tigers to attend the Tokyo Conference, that the 
International Community should pressurize the government to 
accept the Interim Administration Structure proposed by the 
Tigers. 
 
Tamilselvan said that the Diplomats agreed with his 
grievances but were unsure whether they would insist that 
the government establish the Interim Administration 
structure. 
It is true that the Tigers could have bargained for more aid 
had they attended the Tokyo Conference.  But if there is no 
proper structure to utilize the funds received -- however 
much is received -- what is the use? 
 
And where is the assurance that the government won't use the 
full amount, as in the past, on the development of the 
South. 
 
The Government thinks that aid Tiger participation would 
increase aid, but is not interested in giving the north and 
east its rightful share. 
 
By insisting on the Interim Administration, the Tigers have 
passed the ball into Government's court.  Is there a way 
out? 
 
End block quotes. 
 
----- 
¶4. Web sites 
----- 
 
Under the headline "Political confusion in Colombo said 
undermining peace" the LTTE's TAMILNET castigates "the 
political bankruptcy of the Sri Lankan State."  Quoting a 
Tamil National Alliance MP, Selvam Adaikalanathan, TAMILNET 
says: 
 
Block quote. 
 
"It would be absolutely imprudent on our part to predicate 
the future of the Tamil people on the unpredictable 
political climate we are witnessing in Colombo now.  It is 
getting progressively unstable.  A politically powerful 
section of the Sinhala Buddhist clergy asserts that 
President Kumaratunga wowed during a meeting with its 
leaders that she would divide the Northeast province.  The 
political bankruptcy of the Sri Lankan state in solving the 
ethnic conflict never stood so well exposed," said Mr. 
Selvam Adaikalanathan, MP, a senior leader of the Tamil 
National Alliance. 
 
End block quote. 
 
 
Wills