This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001656 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2013 
TAGS: EPET ASEC PINS PGOV NI
SUBJECT: SHELL RESUMES LIMITED PRODUCTION IN WARRI; 
MILITARY PULLS OUT OF TOWN 
 
 
REF: LAGOS 1697 
 
 
Classified by Political Counselor James E. Maxstadt for 
reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) During a September 23 phone conversation with CRO, 
Shell's Security Manager for the Warri area, Tony Obuaya, 
confirmed that three Shell flow stations in the Warri 
Southwest Local Government Area (LGA) have been reopened, 
with one additional site reoccupied and scheduled to resume 
production shortly.  Shell may attempt to resume production 
at other flow stations in Warri North LGA, such as the Jones 
Creek facility, in the near future. 
 
 
¶2. (C) According to Obuaya Shell personnel on September 20 
returned to the two flow stations at Odidi and one at Batan 
and have begun production operations there.  Shell personnel 
have also arrived at the Otumara flow station, but this site 
was damaged and will require some repairs before it can 
resume operations.  Shell personnel were accompanied to the 
sites by substantial numbers of Joint Task Force personnel -- 
Army, Navy and Mobile Police (MOPOL) -- who are remaining on 
site and being given room and board in Shell houseboats.  80 
soldiers and police have been stationed in Odidi, 50 in Batan 
and 80 in Otumara, according to Obuaya.  So far there has 
been no reaction to the military deployment by Ijaw militants. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Noting that wells and flow lines in the area must be 
fully tested before full production can resume, Obuaya was 
nonetheless optimistic that full production could be obtained 
from the four flow stations within the next two weeks.  CRO 
asked if Shell had had to consulted local communities on the 
resumption of operations and deployment of security 
personnel.  Obuaya stated that Shell representatives informed 
several chiefs in the area of the plans to resumed 
production.  The chiefs did not make any explicit demands, 
claims Obuaya, but "reminded" Shell of the need for community 
development assistance. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Obuaya disclosed that he had met with Chevron's 
security officials recently to discuss coordinated plans to 
resume production in the Warri creeks but "they didn't seem 
enthusiastic about going back in."  Obuaya opined that this 
new and tougher Chevron stance was influenced by the USG. 
 
 
MILITARY WITHDRAWAL FROM WARRI TOWN 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) According to a NGO source in Warri town, military 
units stationed at static positions in the town began 
"withdrawing to the barracks" during the morning of September 
¶23.  Troop-carrying trucks and APCs were seen leaving the 
town for the Effurun barracks.  According to the DAO, this is 
in fact the withdrawal of two Army battalions brought in to 
augment the Effurun-based 7th Battalion during the mid-August 
fighting in Warri town. Despite the military withdrawal from 
the streets of the town, a dusk-to-dawn curfew remains in 
effect and apparently will be enforced by MOPOL and regular 
police. 
MEECE