This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 AMMAN 004038 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR STATE NEA ATTN. LIZ CHENEY, 
NEA/PPD MACINESS, BOURGEOIS, 
NEA/RA KWALKER, GGRAPPO, HPIERCE, BKEARY, MSPIRNAK; 
NEA/ARN SZIADEH, 
G/IWI 
NEA/PI AROMANOWSKI, HPEIRCE, CBOURGEOIS, TSTASIUK, TWINCUP, 
SFRANCESKI, RKAPLAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON EAID BTIO PGOV SOCI KWMN PREL KDEM SCUL BEXP PHUM KPAO XF JO ETRO
SUBJECT:  Jordan MEPI Strategy 
 
REF: A) State 126550     B) Amman 01650 
 
     C) State 145089     D) State 155970 
 
¶1.   Following per State 126550 is the post's integrated 
MEPI strategy divided into the three MEPI Pillars: A) 
Economic Reform and Private Enterprise b) Political Reform 
and C) Education. Our approach is based on the good 
governance and citizen awareness strategy outlined in reftel 
B plus the Jordan Mission Program Plan and USAID's proposed 
activities in education. 
 
Economic Pillar (ECON) 
 
¶2. Situation Analysis 
King Abdullah has made economic reform his highest priority 
and has taken key (and sometimes politically costly) steps 
to institute reform.  Beset by high unemployment and 
population growth rates, modest per capita economic growth, 
inadequate water and regional instability, Jordan is taking 
energetic measures to attack its problems.  The Government 
has focused on increasing the role of the private sector and 
improving the country's investment climate by pursuing sound 
economic policies and trade and investment liberalization, 
including a landmark Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the U. 
¶S. that went into effect December 2001.  GDP growth has 
strengthened since 2000, yet high poverty and unemployment 
rates remain significant problems. 
 
¶3. Strategy: Economic Pillar 
 
Jordan's efforts in confronting myriad problems hampering 
economic growth and long-term prosperity are unique in the 
region.  Our support of Jordan's efforts seeks to strengthen 
Jordan as a stable partner within the MEFTA.  The ESF-funded 
USAID program targets building economic opportunities, 
health, population and education programs, and water 
management aimed at bridging the hope gap and improving the 
lives of the ordinary citizens, especially the youth.  An 
OES-supported regional environmental hub officer is based in 
Amman.  The above activities are underpinned by our ongoing 
support for and encouragement of a sound, private sector 
oriented economic policy framework that is conducive to 
increased trade and investment flows between Jordan and the 
rest of the world.  This effort pays special attention to 
encouraging greater transparency in government and private 
sector exchanges, including under the U.S.-Jordan Free Trade 
Agreement and through Jordan's accession to the WTO's 
Government Procurement Agreement. 
 
¶4. Specific Activities and Support Requested 
 
     a) Promote bilateral Trade and Investment in Support of 
     the President's MEFTA objectives. 
 
        --Encourage more effective IPR enforcement through 
        public awareness programs and technical assistance. 
        One large conference or two smaller workshops per 
        year at $ 40,000 per year over three years.  Total: 
        $ 120,000 
 
        --Foster ties between U.S. and Jordanian business 
        associations through exchanges and meetings 
        sponsored by U.S. and Jordanian business community. 
 
        --Train over 20 local business associations in 
        public policy advocacy. Three conference/workshops 
        over three years, $ 40,000 per conference/workshop. 
        Total $ 120,000. 
 
        --Expose new Members of Parliament to key economic 
        issues and concepts, focusing on developing trade 
        relationships with the U.S. (See Democracy Pillar 
        below, part of Parliamentarian training.) 
 
        --Promote understanding of the benefits of modern 
        advances in agricultural science through PA-ECON 
        media activity. 
 
        --Support the growth of microfinance and access to 
        credit for new entrepreneurs in small and medium 
        size business, especially women and youth, through 
        on-going Mission programs in support of the 
        President's regional microfinance initiative. 
 
     b) Support Improved Access to Quality Health Care and 
     Adoption of Environmentally Friendly Agricultural and 
     Industrial Technologies and Regulations 
 
        --Provide training to new Ministry of Environment 
        staff to encourage efficiency and transparency, 
        especially in the conduct of environmental impact 
        assessments. One workshop per year over three years 
        at $ 40,000 per workshop.   Five International 
        Visitor/Training trips to US: $ 75,000 Total 
        $195,000. 
 
        --Provide training for Ministry of Health officials 
        for implementation of a new national health 
        strategy, including training for Jordanian FDA 
        inspectors.  Three workshops over three years at 
        $30,000 per workshop.   Three International 
        Visitor/Training grants: $ 45,000.   Total 
        $135,000. 
 
     c) Support Implementation of Sound Economic Policy 
     Framework Conducive to Sustainable, Private Sector-Led 
     Growth 
 
        --Modernize the national and Aqaba customs 
        authorities through technical assistance and 
        training. 
 
        --Strengthen basic economic education in Jordanian 
        schools through assistance to the Ministry of 
        Education in curriculum development and in 
        providing basic teaching resources. 
 
        -- Through the Fulbright and other academic 
        programs, support law and economic studies 
        instruction at local universities, to include 
        ethics and transparency components. Three 
        university linkage programs at $ 80,000 each.  Five 
        scholarships for junior business faculty at $60,000 
        each. Total: $ 540,000. 
 
        --Support development of modern commercial and 
        corporate governance codes, including the 
        encouragement of regional best practices for 
        corporate transparency through on-going exchange 
        programs and support for local and regional 
        conferences and workshops. 
 
        --Increase the transparency of the commercial legal 
        framework and institutions through training of 
        legal personnel. 
 
        --Conduct workshops for GOJ officials, NGO's and 
        judicial personnel on anti-corruption and 
        transparency practices. Three workshops over three- 
        five years at $ 30,000 per workshop.   Five 
        International Visitor/Training trips to US: 
        $75,000. Total $ 165,000. 
 
        --Support training of local economic journalists in 
        investigative reporting. See journalism training 
        under Democracy Pillar. 
 
        --Support capacity building and training for NGO's 
        dedicated to monitoring government performance and 
        contracting with the private sector.  Grant to 
        local branch of Transparency International or other 
        NGO, amount to be determined. 
 
¶5.   Expected results and timeline 
 
     a) Trade and Investment promotion 
 
     2003:  US-Jordan bilateral trade equals $900 million 
     2004:  US-Jordan bilateral trade equals $1.2 billion 
     2005:  US-Jordan bilateral trade equals $1.3 billion 
 
 
 
     b) Health and Environment 
 
     2003:  Environment ministry formed; first meeting of 
     Joint Environmental Forum held. 
 
     2004:  FDA formed and staffed, training of inspectors 
     begins. 
 
     2005:  Jordanian food and pharmaceutical products 
     cleared by Jordanian and U.S. FDA for export into US 
     market at commercially significant levels. 
     c) Economic policy framework support 
 
     2003:  Private sector complaints about contracting 
     transparency decrease. 
 
     2004:  Customs Mutual Assistance Agreement signed 
     between Jordan and U.S.; IPR infringement cases are 
     brought before commercial courts, with commercially 
     significant damages awarded in appropriate cases. Our 
     major programs on population, health and water 
     management, as well as our region-wide environment 
     program, also look to our longer-term interests in a 
     stable, prosperous Jordan. 
 
     2005:  Jordan accedes to WTO's Government Procurement 
     Agreement. 
 
Political Reform Pillar (USAID) 
 
¶6.   Situation Analysis 
 
Regional tension and continuing economic distress have 
presented the Government of Jordan (GOJ) with difficult 
choices in balancing public order with open expression. 
Jordan has a history as one of the more open political 
systems in the region, but many critics have charged that 
the government has backpedaled since the beginning of the 
Palestinian Intifada in September 2000.  There are some 
recent signs of greater liberalization, and we have 
identified opportunities to strengthen democratic 
institutions and attitudes.  In June 2003, for example, 
Jordan held elections for the Lower House of the Parliament, 
reserving six seats for female candidates.  While the 
electoral process appeared to be clean and transparent, 
critics complained that the legal basis for the elections 
emphasized rural and tribal East Bank elements, which had 
traditionally provided the strongest support for the 
monarchy.  In addition, the King, the Justice and the 
Planning Ministries, and other officials have indicated 
under the Jordan First campaign that they seek more open and 
participatory government through reforms, which will 
reinforce its legitimacy. 
 
¶7.   Strategy 
 
The Mission's strategy aims to strengthen rule of law, 
citizen awareness and activism through the legislative 
branch, the courts and the public education system as well 
as fledgling NGO and other community organizations.  Given 
the political realities of Jordan, it will be necessary to 
cooperate closely with the GOJ, or at least keep it informed 
of activities that could involve its agencies, realizing at 
the same time that democratic change can only come from an 
enlightened and empowered Jordanian people.  Therefore we 
must simultaneously support Jordanian efforts to reform 
their official institutions while helping them raise the 
awareness and participation of the people through NGOs 
-especially women's and youth groups-- and other private, 
civic organizations as well as the public and private 
educational institutions.   We will also support Jordanian 
efforts to strengthen the newly elected Parliament, the 
courts and the regulatory agencies and to raise the accuracy 
and relevance of the news media while working to advance 
journalistic freedom. 
 
¶8.   Specific Activities and Support Requested 
 
     a) Representative Government 
 
        --Train newly elected Parliamentarians, 
        particularly women MPs, supported by a strategy to 
        recruit and train staffers. $150,000 per year for 
        three-five years to include one major in-country 
        workshop plus travel for up to 12 MPs and staffers 
        each year.  $ 300,000 for a possible Citizens 
        Exchange program to train a core group of 
        legislative staffers.  Total $ 850,000. 
 
        --Provide Internet and other information technology 
        training and materials for the Information Resource 
        Center of the New Parliament plus ESL training for 
        some new staff.  Estimated cost $400,000. 
 
        --Support future municipal and parliamentary 
        elections by training candidates, NGO's and 
        election administrators in campaign management and 
        public outreach. Also provide Election coverage 
        workshops for local media. Cost to be determined. 
 
     B)   Rule of Law 
 
        --Judicial exchanges and training in case 
        management, Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) 
        and mediation to promote transparent and prompt 
        civil and criminal justice.  Estimated cost for 
        five training sessions in the US for 12 judges 
        and/or other judicial personnel over five years: 
        $600,000. 
 
        --Assistance to Jordanian law faculties enabling 
        them to improve their instruction of ADR, human 
        rights and women's legal issues plus ESL for 
        faculty and students.  Estimated cost for two 
        academic specialists plus ESL courses at the 
        American Language Center for law students and 
        professors:  $ 200,000. 
 
        --Assist Human Rights organizations and NGOs 
        advocating freedom of expression, particularly 
        those involved in women's issues, through capacity- 
        building workshops, exchanges and other training 
        and support. (Amount to be determined) 
 
     c) Raising Civic Awareness 
 
        --Support new textbooks and teacher training 
        workshops to be conducted by the newly founded Arab 
        Civitas and other NGO's in cooperation with the 
        Education Ministry under its pilot "21st Century 
        Workplace Initiative."  Send two groups of 12 
        principals and cived trainers of pre-school 
        children to observe U.S. best practices.  Estimated 
        cost: $ 150,000 for three annual conference 
        /workshops plus $50,000 each year for assistance to 
        education faculties.  $ 250,000 for the pre-school 
        visitors programs. Total $550,000 over three years. 
 
        --Support school-based activities such as the 
        Scholastic Book Reading Program (Reftel C) plus 
        volunteer activities aimed at developing leadership 
        and civic participation for students in cooperation 
        with parent-teacher associations.  Engage 
        expert/trainers to work with public and private 
        schools and education faculties in designing 
        extracurricular activities.  Estimated cost over 
        four years:  $40,000 per year for visiting experts 
        plus materials. Send 20 parent leaders from local 
        PTA's on a Single Country International Visitor 
        program to observe U.S. counterparts, estimated 
        cost: $150,000. Total: $310,000. 
 
        --Annual summer exchange programs including prior 
        in-country ESL training, home-stays and class 
        participation aimed at exposing 24 Jordanian 
        highschool and/or university student leaders to 
        U.S. best practices in voluntarism, tolerance and 
        youth activities. Estimated cost $120,000 for two 
        exchanges each including 12 students for 4-6 week 
        visits.  Total: $240,000 per year, $720,000 over 
        three years. 
 
        --Help establish the family protection program, 
        including regional centers to counsel women on 
        dealing with domestic violence and to raise 
        awareness among the citizenry and judicial 
        officials.  (Ongoing MEPI-funded program) 
 
        --Hold a regional conference on domestic violence 
        with representatives from the MENA area.  Estimated 
        cost: $100,000. 
 
        --Assist the General Federation of Jordanian Women 
        and the Women's Media Center in conducting a series 
        of 4-5 workshops for women leaders throughout the 
        country, focusing on leadership, media and 
        managerial skills and well as human rights 
        awareness.  Suggested grant amount: $200,000. 
 
        --Expand the "Dialogue of Cultures" between 
        Jordanian, U.S. and other students by promoting 
        internet linkages through workshops for up to 100 
        school administrators per year. Estimated cost: 
        $100,000 ($50,000 per workshop, two each year). 
        Support the ongoing IEARN and Globe programs by 
        sending 20 of their students to the U.S. to design 
        websites and other joint projects with their U.S. 
        counterparts. Estimated cost $7,500 per student or 
        $150,000. Total cost: $250,000 for one year or 
        $750,0000 for three years 
        --ESL Training for 300 Teachers of Social Sciences 
        and Related Subjects per year.  Cost: $ 1,000 per 
        teacher or $ 300,000 per year.  Total: $ 900,000. 
 
        --Strengthening democratic awareness through grants 
        for advanced university study.  Provide up to 6 
        scholarships per year for Ph. D. candidates in 
        political science, law, journalism and related 
        disciplines with local ESL training for the Ph.D. 
        candidates plus additional ESL courses for other 
        junior faculty. Estimated cost: $40,000 per year 
        for 6 scholars for four years: $960,000.  Local ESL 
        training for 100 graduate students and junior 
        faculty: $100,000.  Total cost: $1,060,000. 
 
     d)   Democratic Media 
 
        --Conduct a series of workshops on ethics and media 
        skills, reinforced by media internships in the U.S. 
        Estimated cost:  $80,000 for two workshops per 
        year; $15,000 for 6 internships.  Total 
        $175,000 or $525,000 for three years. 
 
        --Conduct a workshop series on economic reporting. 
        Three to six workshops over three years: $ 120,000. 
 
        --ESL and professional skills training at the 
        American Language Center for 50 young journalists 
        over three years. Total cost $ 300,000. 
 
¶9.   Expected Results and Time Line 
 
       a.   Representative Government 
       FY 2003: Parliament convenes, including successful 
       women candidates and examines backlog of draft 
       legislation. Women participate in clean and 
       transparent municipal elections. 
 
       FY 2004: Parliament improves constituent relations 
       and research on legislation through staff training 
       and regularized contact.  Women MPs initiate 
       legislation, take active role in organizing 
       parliamentary activities. 
 
       FY 2005: Parliament improves its ability to draft, 
       debate and enact legislation, including on such 
       controversial subjects as the repeal/amendment of 
       leniency laws pertaining to honor killings, judicial 
       reform and support for civic education. 
 
       FY 2006: Opinion polls show enhanced confidence in 
       Parliament. 
 
       b.   Rule of Law 
 
       FY 2003: Case management, mediation and Alternative 
       Dispute Resolution (ADR) training conducted for 
       judicial personnel. 
 
       FY 2004: Law schools introduce mediation and ADR; 
       pilot projects introduced in some courts.   Human 
       Rights and Women's Issues NGOs raise awareness among 
       citizens of their legal rights. 
 
       FY 2005 and FY 2006: ADR and Mediation widely 
       accepted and practiced by legal community, private 
       sector and citizens.  Courts begin actively 
       enforcing women's rights and other human rights 
       laws.  Citizen groups such as the National Center 
       for Human Rights conduct public campaigns and raise 
       court cases in defense of civil rights and 
       governmental reform.  Professional contact with 
       other countries' legal communities increases, 
       assisted by increased awareness of internet 
       resources and enhanced English skills. 
 
       c.   Raising Civic Awareness 
       2003: Civic education classes and methodologies are 
       instituted in pilot schools; Citizen groups and NGOs 
       conduct awareness raising programs on human rights 
       and good governance.  Cultural Dialogue programs 
       such as the Scholastic Book Reading program are 
       introduced into private and model public schools. 
       Schools expand Internet linkages to U.S. 
       counterparts. 
 
       2004: Civic education spreads to regional public and 
       private schools; the number of active parent-teacher 
       associations increases; Schools in Jordan and the 
       U.S. establish joint websites and Jordanians 
       introduce student newsletters dealing with civic 
       issues. 
 
       2005: Youth begin to participate in community and 
       other activities; parent-teacher groups begin to 
       effect major innovations in school administration. 
       Women begin to play a more forceful role in the 
       media, judicial system and in community 
       organizations and NGOs. 
 
       2006:  Above activities continue.  Political science 
       faculties, Sharia' Law and other departments 
       institute new democracy-supporting courses taught by 
       newly returned U.S.-trained Ph.D's. 
 
       d.   Democratic Media 
 
       2003: Journalists expand their ESL capabilities, 
       ability to use Internet and other media skills. 
 
       2004:  Print and broadcast media increase the 
       relevance of their coverage to citizens' concerns. 
       Journalists improve the quality of their coverage of 
       human rights, community issues, economic development 
       and business opportunity.  The number of journalists 
       who speak and can do research in English increases. 
 
       2005:  Journalists improve their coverage of 
       elections, women's issues, the parliament and other 
       democratic institutions.  The number of lawsuits and 
       other legal measures against journalists' decline. 
 
Education Pillar 
 
¶10. Situation 
 
Currently in Jordan, most teaching is done through rote 
learning with the use of a broad exam in the final year of 
secondary school for use in admission to post-secondary 
school education.  While the literacy rate in Jordan is 
among the highest in the region at 89 percent, the 
educational system does not produce the type of skills and 
attitudes required in the global market. 
 
¶11.  Strategy 
 
To address the most critical issues in education in Jordan, 
USAID/Jordan, using bi-lateral ESF funding, will focus on 
early childhood education and specifically the participation 
of girls; development of an information and communication 
technology education stream in secondary education, as well 
as other school-to-work curricula; development of standards 
and accreditation together with teacher training and 
curriculum development; continuation and expansion of the 
INJAZ program which raises business awareness among young 
people; Junior Achievement-type activity; life skills 
development for adolescents; and, civic participation. 
USAID's assistance to the education sector will be part of a 
multi-donor effort to support the Government of Jordan's 
initiative to improve education throughout the country.  The 
specific areas in which USAID will work have been selected 
in coordination with the Government and other donors. 
 
¶12.  Specific Activities will be determined after USAID's 
country strategy is approved by the Mission and 
USAID/Washington. 
 
¶13.    The timeline for the new USAID/Jordan education 
strategy will be 2004 - 2009.