This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 000480 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TRA/OTP 
STATE ALSO PASS TSA AND FAA 
ROME, BRUSSELS AND FRANKFURT FOR FAA/CASLO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/05/2013 
TAGS: EAIR ASEC KU
SUBJECT: KUWAITI REQUEST FOR AIR MARSHALS 
 
REF: 02 STATE 78755 
 
Classified By: Charge' d'Affaires, a.i. Frank Urbancic for reason 1.5 ( 
b) 
 
1.(C) On February 5, Embassy received a diplomatic note from 
the Kuwaiti Ministry of Foreign Affairs requesting the 
issuance of 100 entry visas for armed Kuwaiti air marshals. 
Embassy informal translation of the text of the note reads as 
follows: 
 
(Complimentary Open) 
Because of the security condition the region is going through 
and the desire to provide air protection to Kuwait Airways, 
kindly issue entry visas for 100 armed air marshals, whose 
photocopies of their passports are enclosed herewith, to 
enable them to accompany the aircraft of that airline.  We 
hope you will treat this as urgent. 
(Complimentary Close) 
 
2.(U) Post notes the procedure to request air marshals 
outlined in reftel, and also recalls a May 2002 visit by 
CASLO Rome to Kuwait when a letter detailing steps to request 
air marshals was presented to Kuwait air security officials. 
The letter notes that foreign ministries must present a 
diplomatic note announcing their intent to begin such a 
program 30 days in advance of the start date and certifying 
that the proposed individuals are trained and authorized law 
enforcement officers, among other items. 
 
3.(C) Post will follow up with Kuwaiti officials in the MFA, 
the Ministry of Interior, and Kuwait Airways soonest to 
collect information related to the air marshal program as 
outlined in reftel.  Post would appreciate receiving any 
updated guidance that may be pertinent to this request. 
 
4.(C) Comment:  While TSA guidelines require a minimum 30-day 
notice for the start-up of an air marshal program, the 
urgency of the Kuwaiti request is understandable.  We hope 
TSA can work with the Embassy and the GOK to expedite 
 
SIPDIS 
approval of this request. 
 
URBANCIC