This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 003073 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/CT FOR REAP AND EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER VM CTERR
SUBJECT:  VIETNAM:  2003 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 301352 
 
¶1.  Embassy's response to reftel follows in Paragraph 2. 
The response is keyed to the paragraphs in reftel. 
 
¶2. 
A) In 2003, the GVN clearly and frequently denounced 
terrorism domestically and internationally and actively 
supported the global coalition against terrorism.  The GVN's 
total ratified international conventions related to 
counterterrorism remained at eight.  The GVN supported CT 
objectives in international fora, submitting a 
counterterrorism action plan at the August 2003 APEC 
counterterrorism task force meeting, and signing the Joint 
Declaration on Co-operation to Combat Terrorism at the 14th 
annual ASEAN-EU Ministerial Meeting in January 2003.  The 
GVN has continued to agree to receive from the U.S. lists of 
suspected terrorists and organizations, to review its 
immigration records, to add these names to its watchlists, 
and to order searches of the records of all financial 
institutions for assets related to Al-Qaida and other 
terrorist entities.  During 2003, the GVN maintained 
elevated security levels of 2002 at many diplomatic missions 
in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, including those of the U.S., 
to deter terrorism. 
 
B) During 2003, there were no known acts of domestic 
terrorism or prosecutions for acts of terrorism in Vietnam. 
There were no known judicial actions in Vietnam during 2003 
related to acts of international terrorism.  The GVN 
continued through diplomatic channels to press for the 
prosecution of individuals accused of committing "terrorist" 
acts against Vietnamese interests overseas, including 
incidents at two SRV Embassies in 2001.  U.S. authorities 
arrested a U.S. resident on terrorism-related charges in 
October 2001 and continued to hold him pending a judicial 
decision on a request for extradition to stand trial in 
Thailand for an attempt to bomb the SRV Embassy in Bangkok. 
 
C) Extradition:  The GVN did not extradite any suspected 
terrorists during the year, nor were any requests for such 
extraditions made to our knowledge.  The GVN has continued 
to press for the extradition of two individuals resident in 
the U.S. it has accused of complicity in terrorist acts in 
Thailand; one of these individuals was also involved in an 
incident against the SRV Embassy in Bangkok in 2001 (see 
para B) and remains in custody in the U.S. as hearings 
continue on an expedition request by Thailand. 
 
D) There are no significant impediments to prosecution of 
suspected terrorists.  There is no extradition treaty 
between the GVN and the USG.  However, at USG request, the 
GVN has deported individuals accused of crimes to the U.S. 
 
E) The GVN made numerous public statements condemning 
terrorism.  On August 6, the GVN put out a public statement 
"strongly denouncing" the terrorist bombing of the Marriott 
Hotel in Jakarta.  On August 19, Vietnam "strongly 
denounced" the bombing of the UN headquarters in Baghdad and 
declared itself "profoundly shocked" at the terrorist act. 
On August 21, 2003, Vietnam's Foreign Ministry released a 
statement declaring, "We vehemently oppose all acts of 
terror and strongly support efforts to eliminate terrorism 
from the life of mankind."  On September 11, 2003, Vietnam 
"strongly condemned all acts of terrorism against the Iraqi 
innocent civilians."  That same day, Vietnam released an 
official statement on terrorism that read as follows 
(verbatim): 
 
BEGIN SEPTEMBER 11 STATEMENT 
Once again we would like to convey our profound sympathy to 
the American Government and people, and the families of the 
victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks.  The event 
has made the whole mankind more fully aware of the grave 
threat of terrorism.  Terrorism has become a global menace. 
To eliminate terrorism from human life and prevent 
catastrophes it may cause to innocent civilians have become 
imperative, demanding the international community to 
exercise anti-terrorism efforts on the basis of respect for 
the UN Charter, international laws, national independence 
and sovereignty. 
 
Counter-terrorism is a long-lasting combat which is closely 
attached to mankind struggle for a world of peace, 
stability, equality and development.  Consistently, Vietnam 
resolutely denounces and opposes to all terrorist acts under 
any form. Vietnam is and will be actively cooperating with 
the international community to fight against terrorism on 
the basis of respect for the UN Charter, international laws, 
national independence and sovereignty. So far, Vietnam has 
joined eight international conventions on counter-terrorism 
and will take into consideration of joining other treaties. 
Vietnam has, together with other members of ASEAN, ASEM, 
APEC and the UN, strongly condemned international terrorist 
activities and has taken concrete measures against them. 
 
Vietnam has offered active cooperation with the U.S. in 
specific areas including fortifying security at the U.S. 
representative offices in Vietnam. At the same time, we also 
call upon the U.S. and other countries concerned to 
cooperate in preventing and strictly punishing those 
carrying out terrorist schemes and activities against 
Vietnam. 
END SEPTEMBER 11 STATEMENT. 
 
In reaction to the spate of bombings in Iraq, Vietnam 
released the following statement on October 29, 2003: "We 
strongly denounce recent violent acts targeted at innocent 
civilians in Iraq and we are particularly indignant at the 
bombing at the headquarter of the International Red Cross, a 
humanitarian organization which is assisting Iraqi people to 
overcome consequences of many years of sanctions and war. At 
present, it is imperative to restore peace and stability in 
Iraq, enabling the Iraqi people to reconstruct their 
country."  Following the November, 2003 attacks in Istanbul, 
Turkey, the GVN put out statements saying "Vietnam strongly 
condemns the bombings of two synagogues in Istanbul, Turkey 
on November 15th, causing losses to innocent civilians" and 
"Vietnam strongly condemns terrorist bombings causing great 
human and material losses in Istanbul, Turkey on 20th 
November 2003.  The Government and people of Vietnam would 
like to send our deep condolences to families of the 
victims, to the Government and people of Turkey and of 
countries which have victims in the bombings." 
 
The GVN has cooperated with the USG in a number of 
counterterrorism areas.  The State Bank of Vietnam has 
issued instructions to all state, private, foreign, and 
joint venture banks and branches to search for assets 
related to named entities on lists provided by the USG, 
although it lacks an effective mechanism for reporting 
results of these searches.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
has agreed that the Ministry of Public Security (MPS) would 
check immigration records against lists of suspected 
terrorists provided by the USG, though the GVN has not yet 
reported results from these checks.  At USG request, MPS has 
provided a highly visible security presence around USG 
facilities. 
 
Prior to 2001, the investigation and prevention of 
international terrorism was not a major component of the 
bilateral relationship.  However, since September 11, 2001, 
the GVN has cooperated in a number of ways with the USG 
efforts to investigate those responsible for committing 
terrorist acts against U.S. citizens and interests.  The GVN 
has agreed to conduct checks of immigration records on lists 
of names of terrorists who may have transited through 
Vietnam.  Immigration authorities have also generally 
responded promptly to USG requests for checking the 
bonafides of passports and visas, especially when tipped off 
that the passport holders are behaving suspiciously.  The 
GVN has contributed investigative support to U.S. efforts to 
identify and suspend financial assets of terrorists and 
terrorist groups. 
 
There have been no acts of terrorism committed against U.S. 
citizens or interests in Vietnam within the country for more 
than five years.  (There were incidents against SRV 
Embassies in Manila and Bangkok in 2001, and an arson 
attempt directed against a Deputy Prime Minister visiting 
San Francisco in 2001.)  The GVN has provided increased 
police presence at USG facilities and developed measures to 
respond to specific threat situations. 
 
F) The GVN supported CT objectives in international fora, 
submitting a counterterrorism action plan at the August 2003 
APEC counterterrorism task force meeting, and signing the 
Joint Declaration on Co-operation to Combat Terrorism at the 
14th annual ASEAN-EU Ministerial Meeting in January 2003. 
The GVN also set up a special research and analysis unit 
within the Ministry of Public Security to examine the 
situation and recommend counterterrorism policy, and 
maintained mechanisms for the exchange of information on 
terrorism with the U.S., Singapore, China, Thailand, and 
Japan as well as within ASEAN. 
 
G) The GVN does not support international terrorism, 
terrorists, or terrorist groups. 
 
H) The GVN has not publicly supported a terrorist-supporting 
country on a terrorism-specific issue. 
 
I) The GVN's attitude towards terrorism has remained steady 
since 2002. 
BURGHARDT