This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 000331 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/RPM, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2012 
TAGS: PREL MOPS MARR TU IZ NATO
SUBJECT: NATO/IRAQ: TURKEY PATIENT FOR NOW BUT LOOKING FOR 
NATO COVER 
 
 
REF: STATE 9504 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch, reasons 1.5, b/d. 
 
 
¶1. (S) Summary: MFA DG for International Security Affairs 
Morali told DCM January 13 that NATO should move forward 
prudently on Articles IV and V with respect to Iraq. 
Nevertheless, the GOT hopes the package outlined in reftel 
with evolve as necessary and discussion of Article IV will 
not be deferred indefinitely.  Morali noted that making 
public the discussion of Iraq at NATO would ease the Turkish 
public's anxiety over an Iraq operation and provide Turkey 
international legitimacy to cooperate with the US.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (S) DCM delivered reftel points to MFA DG for 
International Security Affairs Morali January 13, emphasizing 
that discussion of Article IV and Iraq at NATO was premature 
and that the US needed more time to prepare for the 
discussion.  Morali appreciated that the USG responded 
quickly to the Turkish initiative, which was "moving in the 
direction of concrete action."  Morali noted the activity was 
opening the way for NATO involvement in a potential 
operation, which the GOT had been pursuing in order to gain 
international legitimacy and allay public anxiety about an 
operation.  He added that the point of the initiative was not 
to turn US plans into a NATO operation, but to get legitimacy 
for Turkey's participation.  The "political essence" of this 
exercise was important for this reason and could facilitate a 
political decision by the GOT.  Therefore, while prudence was 
important, the GOT did not want the discussion deferred 
indefinitely.  Morali said NATO solidarity should "come in a 
timely way," preferably by January 27 when the Blix report 
was due.  Furthermore, the GOT needed its public to know that 
its defense was being discussed at NATO in order to counter 
public disapproval of a military operation and Turkey's 
involvement in it.  Morali assured the DCM that the 
discussion of Article V was not urgent and would be taken up 
if and when Iraq attacked Turkey. 
 
 
¶3. (S) Morali observed that the addition of CBW defense 
capabilities to the package presented to the NAC by Wolfowitz 
was welcome.  He hoped the package would evolve as additional 
measures became necessary.  Morali agreed that tasking the 
NMAs as proposed by reftel was the normal way to proceed and 
should not encounter any problems among other Allies. 
 
 
¶4. (S) Comment: For now, the GOT is satisfied with the US 
response to its request for Article IV and V discussions at 
NATO.  The process itself provides the new Turkish government 
the cover it needs to convince the public its defense is 
being carefully considered and that the operation has 
international legitimacy.  Providing the GOT this cover soon, 
will facilitate its deliberations on Iraq policy. 
PEARSON