This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000567 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING MARCH 20 2003 
 
REF: A. SANAA 521 
     ¶B. SANAA 520 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened an 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meeting on March 20 to 
assess threat information in light of developments with the 
Iraq contingency and further information on the shooting 
incident at the Hunt Oil facility in Marib (refs a, b and 
septel).  Embassy will move to StandFast posture at the close 
of business March 20.  Key offices and personnel represented 
at the meeting included: AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, 
RSO, ORCA, OMC, SOC YEMEN and RMO. 
 
------------------------------------ 
MOI, PSO and Protection of Americans 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Ambassador, DCM and RSO met with Interior 
Minister Alimi and Political Security Organization (PSO) 
Chief Gamish for two hours on March 19 (details reported 
septel).  Gamish said that President Saleh has given PSO/MOI 
the mission of protecting Americans and close coordination 
would be key.  MOI agreed.  Ambassador briefed on Embassy 
plans for MoveSafe and StandFast postures, which was welcomed 
by MOI and PSO Chief.  Ambassador brought up a number of 
items, including getting needed ammunition out of customs 
limbo, obtaining enough civilian (non-diplomatic) license 
plates for Embassy vehicles, having security provided for the 
YALI teachers shuttle and noting several Iraq-related issues. 
 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  MOI brought up the following: 
 
-- request for name and contact information on all/all 
Americans in Yemen to facilitate strong protection; 
 
-- closure of the road in front of the Embassy; 
 
-- assurance that Embassy personnel movements would be 
minimal and coverage be provided by Yemeni security; 
 
-- announcement of a 24-hour ROYG security hotline staffed by 
English speakers for Amcits with the phone number 
disseminated via Warden Message and other means; 
 
-- request for Americans to avoid known Western gathering 
places for the time being. 
 
---------------------------- 
Update on Shootings in Marib 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Embassy investigative team returned from Marib 
the evening of March 19, and at this stage, there is no 
information indicating that the tragic incident was anything 
other than a criminal attack.  Investigators have several 
strong leads to continue their inquiry.  A clear picture is 
emerging of how the slayings occurred; however, the shooter's 
motive remains unclear.  Investigation has yet to uncover any 
anti-Western or extremist views by the perpetrator. 
Witnesses confirm that the shooter had sleeping problems and 
was involved in a family dispute, and he was on several kinds 
of medication.  Contrary to press reports, no evidence 
confirms allegations that the shooter had been a poor 
employee or fired at any time.  Embassy is providing other 
assistance as needed.  Details reported septel.  See 
paragraph 8 for the March 20 public statement. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Threats, Security and 
StandFast 3/20 COB for Iraq Contingency 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  ORCA said there was no change to current threat 
information.  EAC members discussed the possibility of 
demonstrations, particularly after mosque sermons on Friday, 
March 21, but had no information of planned demonstrations at 
this time.  RSO reported that airport officials indicated 
that so far only Egyptair would curtail operations. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  EAC members agreed to move the StandFast posture 
today (March 20) at close of business as previously planned. 
FSNs were notified at a DCM-led meeting in the afternoon, 
where the decision to alter parking access for FSNs was also 
discussed. 
 
¶5.  (C)  RSO reported the guidance on the access of vehicles 
and personnel (American and FSN) would be disseminated via 
Administrative Notice.  He also said that a room in the 
Sheraton Hotel had been identified to act as a gathering 
point for Embassy personnel staying there.  The Alternate 
Command Center is ready and three employees will staff it 
during StandFast. 
---------------------------- 
Consular and Warden Messages 
---------------------------- 
¶6.  (C)  CONS Chief said they were coordinating with all 
sections on the request from MOI for information on Americans 
for protective purposes.  Per privacy act provisions, CONS is 
contacting all Americans to get permission for release of 
information before providing it to the government 
authorities. 
 
¶7.  (U)  A Warden Message will be sent March 20 to announce 
Embassy closure/StandFast posture and the MOI hotline number, 
warn about possible demonstrations and give an update on what 
is known about the Marib incident.  It will also advise that 
the consular section will also be closed during StandFast, 
except for emergency services. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Text of Public Statement on the investigation of the 
Marib attack follows: 
 
The investigation of the March 18 attack in Marib, in which 
an American, a Canadian and a Yemeni were killed, is still 
continuing. 
 
At this time, we are unable to ascertain the motivation 
behind the attack.  However, we have no evidence at this 
stage that this was anything other than a criminal attack. 
HULL