This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 001705 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO EB:DMALAC, OES:HLEE 
DEPT ALSO PASS USAID:JLEWIS 
DEPT ALSO PASS EPA FOR JANDERSON 
FDA FOR RLAKE 
USDA FOR FAS/OA:BSIMMONS, APHIS/BRS:JTURNER 
NEW DELHI FOR FAS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD SENV TBIO TSPL CE ECONOMICS
SUBJECT:  STATUS OF BIOTECHNOLOGY REGULATIONS IN SRI LANKA 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 263456 
 
¶1.  Summary: Sri Lanka does not have formal 
biotechnology regulations on the production and 
import of agricultural biotech products into the 
country.  An attempt to ban the import of GMO foods 
in 2001 was abandoned due to intense lobbying from 
foreign missions (including the U.S) and trade 
partners.  Currently, NGOs opposed to GMOs are 
promulgating labeling for importation of GMO 
products.  There is much confusion regarding the 
benefits and risks of biotech products in Sri Lanka, 
as information available in the local media does not 
accurately reflect an unbiased view of 
biotechnology.  End Summary 
 
¶2.  Sri Lanka signed the Biosafety Protocol on 24 May 
2000, and plans to ratify the agreement as early as 
possible.  The Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources is the focal point for biosafety and has 
an obligation to implement the articles of the 
protocol.  The Ministry has initiated a project to 
establish a National Biosafety Framework (NBF) to 
ensure safety in import of GMOs into the country. 
The Framework must be completed before ratification 
of the Protocol.  One of Sri Lanka's most prominent 
agricultural scientists, Professor Athula Perera, 
has been appointed the National Project Coordinator 
and is entrusted with the task of producing a 
comprehensive NBF document.  Professor Perera was 
responsible for setting up the first biotech 
laboratory in the country and has implemented trials 
for some crops. 
 
¶3.  The project is expected to take approximately 18 
months to complete.  The planned outcomes from the 
establishment of the NBF include: 
 
--inventories of current use of biotechnology, 
--existing legal instruments related to 
biotech/biosafety, 
--active or planned national projects for capacity 
building related to the safe use of biotechnology, 
--database of relevant experts, 
--access to relevant information for all 
stakeholders, 
--mechanisms for adequate involvement of all 
stakeholders on biosafety-related issues, 
--drafts of legal instruments, 
--systems of risk management and audit, 
--administrative system for compliance with the 
Cartegena Protocol, 
--mechanisms for public consultations on the 
decision making process regarding GMOs, 
--mechanism for sharing scientific knowledge at 
subregional level, 
--publication of inventories, 
--reports of national meetings and the final 
national biosafety framework. 
 
¶4.  The Council for Agriculture Research Policy 
(CARP), a government-funded research organization, 
and the National Science Foundation are actively 
involved in researching priority areas to 
incorporate biotech into the domestic agriculture 
and livestock sectors.  Rice, rubber and ornamental 
fish have already been identified in this respect. 
Professor Perera also commented that the 
establishment of the NBF will assist the country in 
harnessing all aspects of modern biotechnology under 
a central focal point in a safe and responsible 
manner.  The NBF, according to Dr. Perera, will not 
be a barrier, but a mechanism to incorporate modern 
technology into domestic agriculture. 
 
¶5.  Contact information for the NBF Project follows: 
The National Project Coordinator 
National Biosafety Framework Development Project 
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources 
104, Robert Gunawardane Mawatha 
Battaramulla 
Sri Lanka 
Tel:  94-1-286-1395 
E-mail:  nbfsl@sltnet.lk 
 
LUNSTEAD