This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 001468 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM PINR NI
SUBJECT: NEW INEC COMMISSIONERS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR PUBLISHING ON THE 
INTRANET OR INTERNET. 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: President Obasanjo submitted names of ten new 
national Commissioners for the Independent National Electoral 
Commission (INEC), along with the names of two currently 
serving Commissioners and the national Chairman, to the 
Senate for confirmation.  After a walkout by opposition 
senators, the ruling People's Democratic Party 
(PDP)-dominated Senate approved them and nine were sworn in 
August 26. End Summary 
 
 
¶2. (U) On 12 August, President Obasanjo submitted names of 
ten new national Commissioners for INEC to the Senate for 
confirmation.  Obasanjo recommended the retention of two 
other Commissioners and the Chairman, whose terms have not 
yet expired.  Besides the Chairman, there are two 
Commissioners for each of the six geo-political zones, each 
serving five-year terms.  During the debate over the 
selections, senators belonging to the All Nigerian People's 
Party (ANPP - the main opposition party) staged a walkout in 
protest after Senate President Wabara (PDP) refused to allow 
any delays in voting to accommodate debate, provide 
additional documentation on the nominees, and provide an 
opportunity to question the nominees individually.  The PDP 
then used its Senate majority to approve all of the 
Commissioners. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Of the ten new Commissioners, four had previously 
served as state-level Commissioners.  Representing the 
North-East will be Esther Salleh of Taraba State and Alhaji 
Mohammed Abubakar of Bauchi State.  Abubakar had previously 
been the State Commissioner for Rivers State (in the 
South-South), possibly the state with the most allegations of 
malpractice during the April elections.  Representing the 
North-West will be Alhaji Bello Bala of Kebbi State and Dr. 
Shehu Lawal of Kaduna State.  Lawal had previously been the 
State Commissioner for Edo State (in the South-East).  The 
Edo State capital, Benin City, saw the more violence than 
most places in the run-up to the elections, and the few 
observers who could gain access to the city had major 
misgivings about the elections thereafter.  Representing the 
North-Central will be Setley Daze of Plateau State and 
Engineer Anuka Uchola of Kogi State. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Mrs. Olukemi Odebiyi of Ogun State and Chief Nimbe 
Farukanmi of Ondo State will represent the South-West. 
Odebiyi was formerly the State Commissioner for Lagos State. 
Professor Maurice M. Iwu from Imo will join  Engineer F. 
Nwankwo of Ebonyi State in the South-East.  Ekpeyong Nsa of 
Cross River State, who had previously been the State 
Commissioner for Yobe State (in the North-East), will join 
Dr. Ishmael Igbani of Rivers State in the South-South. 
 
 
¶5. (U) The two Commissioners retained, Nwankwo and Igbani, 
both stepped into their positions during Obasanjo's first 
civilian administration when their predecessors vacated 
office (one died and the other retired).  Nwankwo has one 
year remaining in his term and Igbani almost the full five 
years.  INEC Chairman Abel Guobadia also has four years 
remaining in his term, having assumed office last year when 
the former Chairman retired. 
 
 
¶6. (U) On August 26, the ANPP formally filed a motion at the 
Federal High Court in Abuja to restrain Obasanjo from 
swearing in the new commissioners.  Obasanjo swore nine of 
ten (Salleh was not present) in anyway on August 26, and the 
court adjourned hearings on the matter until September 2. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT: INEC Chairman and Commissioner appointments 
are crucial issues in the conduct of elections in Nigeria at 
both the national and local level.  Stakeholders outside the 
ruling party have constantly demanded an inclusive 
Commission.  Obasanjo's nominations - and the process by 
which they were confirmed - were not inclusive, and bode ill 
for election reform in general. 
ROBERTS