This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 005941 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPAL JO
SUBJECT: MB AND MP'S CONDEMN EU BLACKLISTING OF HAMAS; GOJ 
AND ISLAMISTS DENOUNCE ISRAELI DECISION TO EXPEL ARAFAT 
 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires David Hale for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
------ 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Both the Jordanian Mulsim Brotherhood (MB) and a 
majority of members of Parliament (MP's) publicly rebuked the 
European Union for its recent moves against the political 
wing of Hamas.  After Israel announced its intention "in 
principle" to expel Yaser Arafat, the GOJ came out firmly 
against the decision, while Islamists used it as ammunition 
in their campaign to cut ties with the Israel. 
 
------------------------------- 
TAKING AIM AGAINST THE EUROPEANS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) In response to the EU decision to classify the 
political wing of Hamas as a terrorist group and to freeze 
its assets, the MB in Jordan issued a harshly worded 
statement on September 8 denouncing the EU action.  Calling 
on the EU to immediately annul the decision, the MB stated 
that it was "tantamount to a new crusader's war" and that it 
was "hostile to our Islamic nation and the Palestinian people 
because Hamas . . . is the conscience of the Arab and Muslim 
nation." 
 
¶3. (U) To further express its anger at Brussels, the MB also 
threatened to call for a boycott of European goods unless the 
EU backed down from its position.  According to the 
statement, the MB would urge Muslim clerics to issue a fatwa, 
or religious edict, to enforce the proposed boycott. 
 
¶4. (U) In a related development, 59 out of 110 members of the 
Lower House of Parliament signed and circulated on September 
13 a memorandum condemning the EU decision, alleging that it 
came under U.S. pressure and revealed an unacceptable bias 
towards Israeli occupation.  The memo further stated that by 
supporting Israeli "injustice," the EU was depriving itself 
of a political role in the region. 
 
------------------------------------- 
A RESOUNDING "NO" TO BANISHING ARAFAT 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Apart from the EU action, there was also widespread 
opposition to the recent Israeli decision "in principle" to 
expel Yaser Arafat.  According to the local press, Foreign 
Minister Marwan Muasher deemed it a "dangerous" move with 
serious repercussions for the region, while Information 
Minister Nabil Sharif described the decision as a "serious 
mistake." 
 
¶6. (U) Hamzah Mansour, the secretary general of the Islamic 
Action Front (IAF), the political arm of the MB, described 
the Israeli decision as "humiliating" to the Palestinians, 
and called on Arab nations that have relationships with 
Israel to immediately cut all ties and to expel Israeli 
ambassadors from Arab capitals. 
 
¶7. (U) The IAF also led a charge against Israel's expulsion 
decision in Parliament.  Seventeen MP's signed a letter 
urging the GOJ to play a more vigorous role to "expose 
Israeli practices," including the effort to banish Arafat, "a 
legitimate leader elected by the Palestinian people." 
Fourteen IAF MP's signed a memorandum denouncing the Israeli 
action as a "criminal and reckless decision" and threatened 
to ask the Lower House of Parliament to annul or abrogate the 
peace treaty between Jordan and Israel. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) The fact that a majority of MP's denounced in writing 
the EU action against Hamas shows that, while Jordanians may 
not approve of Hamas tactics and violence, many nevertheless 
see it as a legitimate resistance group providing valuable 
social services.  (We note that the GOJ has just decided to 
freeze Hamas assets in Jordan - septel.)  The dearth of 
signatures on the other memorandums reflects far less 
approval in Parliament for efforts to cut Jordanian ties with 
Israel. 
HALE