This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 001875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/02/2013 
TAGS: KNNP PARM MNUC PREL IR CA IAEA
SUBJECT: IAEA/IRAN: CANADIAN VIEWS ON NEXT STEPS 
 
REF: STATE 186962 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Canada would support a summer IAEA Board meeting 
(reftel) so long as there is consensus for a resolution or 
other strong statement at that meeting on the Iranian nuclear 
program.  Ron Stansfield, Foreign Affairs' Acting Director 
for Nuclear and Chemical Disarmament, told us on July 2 that 
Canada wants to see what comes out of ElBaradei's July 9 
visit to Tehran, and that the IAEA technical secretariat is 
coming up with some interesting findings.  If we could deal 
Iran a "crushing blow" at an early meeting, then Canada would 
support going forward.  Otherwise, Canada believes we should 
wait for the regular BOG meeting on September 8-12, as there 
is still far to go in getting other Board members to agree to 
a resolution.  Stansfield assured us that Canada would 
continue to push for Iranian compliance with the IAEA, both 
publicly and privately. 
 
¶2. (SBU) We thanked Stansfield for Foreign Minister Graham's 
public statement on Iran  following the most recent BOG 
meeting.  Graham's statement, issued on June 20, reads as 
follows: 
 
"Canada fully supports the outcome of this week's discussion 
of Iran's nuclear program and applauds the IAEA for its 
excellent work on this issue.  We expect this work will 
continue with the same rigour. 
 
Canada is extremely concerned about the IAEA's findings that 
Iran has failed to report nuclear material, facilities and 
activities, as required uncer its Safeguards Agreement with 
the Agency and consistent with its obligations under the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.  This is a serious pattern 
of failure that calls into question Iran's assurances of full 
transparency and cooperation, and even more so, its 
commitment to nuclear non-proliferation. 
 
Canada joins the Board of Governors in urging Iran to 
demonstrate its full compliance by promptly rectifying all 
problems identified by the IAEA, resolving all questions 
about its nuclear program that remain open, and agreeing to 
other measures sought by the IAEA.  We note the assurances 
that Iran has provided about the peaceful nature of its 
nuclear program.  The clearest possible demonstration of this 
would be Iran's early and unconditional acceptance of an 
Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement." 
CELLUCCI