This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 000031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/04/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER YM EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - 4 JANUARY 2003 
 
REF: SANAA 04060 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin summary: The Ambassador convened an EAC 
meeting on January 4, 2003, to assess recent threat 
information that emerged from the investigation of the Dec. 
30 Jibla Hospital shooting (see reftel) and adopt measures to 
enhance security for Yemen-based American citizens.  Key 
offices and personnel represented at the meeting included: 
DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, RMO, ORCA, DAO, OMC, SOC 
YEMEN, FPD and FBI.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  The Ambassador held an EAC meeting on January 4 
to analyze investigative findings known thus far about the 
December 30 Jibla Hospital shooting and how this information 
can be used to bolster security for Americans who reside and 
work in Yemen.  FBI conveyed that the perpetrator, Abd 
Abdulrazak Mohammed Kamel, was motivated to kill Dr. Martha 
Myers primarily because he was told of her success in 
converting numerous Yemenis from Islam to Christianity.  FBI 
emphasized Kamel's focus on killing proselytizers, relaying 
that Kamel confessed he has nothing against Americans, 
Christians or Jews.  Nevertheless, Kamel added that U.S. 
Middle East policy is partly to blame for his actions, based 
on the U.S. military presence in the Red Sea and Arabian 
Peninsula and support for Israel. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  EAC discussed the nature and extent of the 
linkage between Kamel and Ali Al-Jarala (who assassinated the 
Deputy Secretary General of the Yemeni Socialist Party on 
December 28), focusing on the potential risk facing the 
American community.  The Ambassador concluded that the most 
prominent targets are Yemeni secularist politicians, 
missionaries and members of the U.S. military.  However, he 
placed great importance on determining which other 
individuals may be in danger, tasking POLM, RSO and FBI to 
request further information from the PSO and Ministry of 
Interior. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  EAC identified specific organizations whose 
members and employees may be vulnerable because they are 
either U.S. citizens, organizations with U.S. affiliations, 
or organizations associated with religious groups or 
practices.  The list includes: Yemen America Language 
Institute (part of the U.S. Embassy); United Nations; the 
NGOs CARE, Amideast and National Democratic Institute; Sanaa 
International School; Adra (a faith-based Christian USAID 
contractor); a Protestant-run eye clinic; and Sanaa-based 
church services held in private residences.  The Ambassador 
assigned particular EAC members to liaise with appropriate 
organization leaders to advise of the threat and consult on 
the implementation of additional security practices.  FPD 
will return to Jibla to conduct a security review for the 
benefit of Americans who choose to remain. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  The meeting ended with concern about any 
potential danger associated with unofficial travel within 
Yemen.  EAC concluded that unofficial travel will be approved 
on a case by case basis. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Ambassador will meet with American wardens, 
including representatives of groups noted para. 4, to share 
information on Jibla attack and encourage self-assessments of 
vulnerabilities and heightened security. 
HULL