This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 001102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, NEA/FO 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2013 
TAGS: PREL MOPS MARR EAID IZ KU
SUBJECT: (C) IRAQI OPPOSITIONISTS AND RECONSTRUCTION; 
MINSTATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS RAISES WAR ISSUES WITH THE 
AMBASSADOR 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Richard H. Jones for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  On March 24, during an introductory call for 
Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA) 
Director, Gen. Jay Garner, he and the Ambassador discussed 
war-related issues with Minstate for Foreign Affairs Shaykh 
Dr. Mohammed Al-Sabah .  Among the items raised were ORHA's 
structure and mission, the inclusion of Iraqi oppositionists 
in war efforts and Kuwait's efforts to begin providing 
humanitarian assistance.  End Summary. 
 
---- 
ORHA 
---- 
 
¶2. (C) Dr. Mohammed was very interested in the structure and 
mission of ORHA, and asked Gen. Garner if ORHA would wait 
until securing Baghdad to begin its operations.  He also 
asked for Gen. Garner's assessment of the humanitarian 
situation in Iraq, and inquired as to how ORHA would 
distribute humanitarian goods.  Gen. Garner explained that he 
reported to CENTCOM Commander Gen. Franks and SecDef 
Rumsfeld.  He said ORHA has plans to place teams in every 
city with a population over 100,000, and would do so as soon 
as the security situation permitted.  The teams, which are 
composed mainly of civilians, are hoping to distribute 
humanitarian assistance via the already existing Oil For Food 
(OFF) distribution mechanisms.  Gen. Garner said the UNSC 
Resolution currently in the works is aimed at continuing the 
OFF program.  The UK and US are working directly with the 
UNSYG in an attempt to get the resolution introduced over 
French and Russian objections.  Although the humanitarian 
situation has not been as bad as had been expected, he said, 
aid distribution will be ORHA's first priority in Iraq.  If 
the situation deteriorates further, Gen. Garner said ORHA 
will look at all options for aid distribution, including 
airdrops. 
 
¶3. (C) Dr. Mohammed also asked Gen. Garner about the current 
status of oil fires in Iraq.  Garner explained that the Army 
Corps of Engineers, along with Kuwaiti firefighters and 
civilians contracted through ORHA, would be putting out the 
oil fires near Basra.  The Ambassador confirmed that the U.S. 
has no solid evidence that wells in Kirkuk were ever blown. 
 
----------------------- 
IRAQI OPPOSITION GROUPS 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The Minister also raised concerns that the U.S. may 
not be making a sufficient effort to fully inform the Iraqi 
people of its goals.  He said there seemed to be "ambiguity" 
amongst the Iraqis, and asked if we were broadcasting our 
message into Iraq alongside our forces.  Gen. Garner 
confirmed that multiple efforts are being made to ensure the 
Iraqi people are fully aware of U.S. reconstruction plans, 
including leaflet drops and radio broadcasts.  In addition, 
he said, ORHA teams will be increasing radio broadcasts as 
soon as they enter Iraq. 
 
¶5. (C) Building on this concern, the Minister suggested the 
U.S. avail itself of Iraqi oppositionists to help spread the 
U.S. message inside Iraq.  He said that the Shiite Supreme 
Council for the Islamic Revolutionin Iraq (SCIRI), in 
particular, had been complaining to the GOK that they had 
been "sidelined."  "The time for fighting back" against Iraqi 
propaganda was now, he said, and suggested that the US 
utilize SCIRI to do so, especially in the south.  "Most of 
the fighting back should be carried out by Iraqis," he said. 
"You need to choose the right instruments to accomplish your 
goals." 
 
---------------------- 
KUWAIT'S CONTRIBUTIONS 
---------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Confirming an announcement that had been made in the 
press earlier in the week, Dr. Mohammed said Kuwait had begun 
treating Iraqis injured in the fighting at Umm Qasr in a 
field hospital it had set up on the Kuwaiti side of the 
border at UNIKOM's old HQ at Camp Khor.  In addition, Kuwait 
has already provided humanitarian aid, which has been loaded 
onto a ship waiting to enter Iraq at Umm Qasr.  Dr. Mohammed 
said Kuwait is interested in publicizing its efforts, and 
indicated he would appreciate it if the Ambassador and Gen. 
Garner kept Kuwait in mind should opportunities for publicity 
arise. 
 
¶7. (U) Gen. Garner has not cleared this message. 
JONES