This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000946 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINR ZI
SUBJECT: STATE WITNESSES HELP DEFENSE AS TSVANGIRAI TREASON 
TRIAL RESUMES 
 
REF: A. HARARE 568 
     ¶B. HARARE 484 
     ¶C. HARARE 360 
     ¶D. HARARE 313 
     ¶E. HARARE 250 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) The treason trial of MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai, 
MDC Secretary General Welshman Ncube, and MDC Shadow Minister 
of Agriculture Renson Gasela resumed on May 12 for its ninth 
week after a month-long recess.  The Defense intends to move 
for acquittal by the end of May, and the judge will likely 
weigh carefully his own career longevity in his decision. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) The treason trial of MDC President Morgan Tsvangirai, 
MDC Secretary General Welshman Ncube, and MDC Shadow Minister 
of Agriculture Renson Gasela resumed on May 12 for its ninth 
week after a month-long recess.  According to lead defense 
attorney George Bizos, based on the State's weak evidence 
presented so far, the defense intends to move for dismissal 
by the end of May; on May 15 Tsvangirai said he was confident 
that he would be acquitted.  Another defense lawyer, Innocent 
Chagonda, was also confident this week that judge Garwe would 
find it difficult to convict Tsvangirai. 
 
¶3. (U) On May 12 and 13, the defense continued its 
cross-examination of Assistant Police Commissioner Moses 
Magandi.  The State's star witness Ari Ben Menashe previously 
said that he had informed Magandi, while they were traveling 
to England for a meeting with Tsvangirai, that he was going 
to the DRC later to meet with Rupert Johnson.  But Magandi 
denied this week that Menashe told him of his trip to the 
DRC.  Bizos also questioned Magandi on whether he had 
informed his superiors that the videotape did not show 
Tsvangirai saying that he wanted to "assassinate" President 
 
SIPDIS 
Mugabe.  Magandi admitted that he did not.  When Bizos asked 
Magandi if there were any special identifying marks on the 
videotape and the audiotape that could be used to confirm 
that the tapes in front of them were the correct tapes, 
Magandi admitted that there were no special marks.  However, 
he refused to admit that it would have been easy for anyone 
to change the tapes. 
 
¶4. (U) The prosecution then introduced the next state 
witness, Central Investigation Department (CID) Officer 
Stephen Mutamba.  Although Mutamba admitted that the quality 
of the audiotape was poor, except for one part, he still 
managed to read from a police transcript what the police 
believed Ben Menashe to have said at the second London 
meeting.  During his cross-examination by the defense, 
Mutamba admitted that he had only been looking for evidence 
that would incriminate Morgan Tsvangirai and ignored evidence 
that Tsvangirai had not said anything about "assassinating" 
Mugabe. 
 
¶5. (C) In circumstances where it was obvious that Ben Menashe 
had lied, Magandi and Mutamba preferred to say that they did 
not know what Ben Menashe had said.  Based on misstatements 
Magandi made, the state appeared to have coached the second 
witness, Mutamba, and he was better prepared for 
cross-examination. 
 
¶6. (U) Although the attendance in court was poor at first, 
toward the end of the week it increased steadily.  On May 12, 
nine members of the MDC women's league were arrested after 
they were denied entry to the High Court allegedly because 
they were not dressed appropriately; they were wearing MDC 
t-shirts. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶7. (C) Both witnesses' testimony appeared to benefit the 
defense more than the prosecution even though they were State 
witnesses.  Under apolitical circumstances we would be 
confident of acquittal.  However, the circumstances are not 
apolitical.  The central questions the GOZ and Judge Garwe 
faces are whether there is any basis under the law for a 
conviction, what would be the political fallout of convicting 
Tsvangirai with such flimsy evidence, and whether the Supreme 
 
SIPDIS 
Court would overturn the conviction (which the defense would 
surely appeal).  Judge Garwe, current Judge President of the 
High Court, must also be pondering if his career will outlast 
the current regime, and the potential damage of a conviction 
for his own reputation.  End Comment. 
WHITEHEAD