This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000125 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FSINFATC FOR SPAS/POL: ELLEN COSGROVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PREL AFSI AFSN PGOV CE
SUBJECT:  Nomination for Political FSN training course 
 
Ref:  02 State 255305 
 
¶1.  In response to Reftel, Mission nominates Ms. Padmini 
Raajadurrai to attend the April 7 to 18 training course 
for Political FSNs at NFATC. 
 
¶2.  Information on the nominee is keyed to the order of 
the queries in Reftel: 
 
Name -- Padmini Raajadurrai 
Grade -- FSN-10 
Length of Service -- 4 years and 5 months 
Time spent in the U.S. -- 6 weeks (In 1979 and 2002 Ms. 
Raajadurai vacationed in the U.S.) 
Previous training in the U.S. -- None 
Previous nominations for political training course -- 
Yes, for May 2002 course 
 
¶3.  Narrative justification for nomination: 
 
The peace process between the Sri Lankan government and 
the Tamil Tigers has sharply increased the Political 
Section's workload.  Ms. Raajadurai's portfolio has been 
crucial in this timeframe, as we turn to her constantly 
for information on what is happening Tamil-speaking 
areas, including those areas now controlled by the Tamil 
Tigers, a notorious terrorist organization.  To keep 
track of what is happening in the Tamil community, 
Mission will be adding a Tamil-speaking Political 
Officer in April 2003.  We expect that Raajadurai will 
play a key role in educating this officer on the 
situation in Sri Lanka, including travelling with him to 
key points throughout the island. 
 
Raajadurrai has developed excellent contacts, and has 
the ability to retrieve vast amounts of information from 
those contacts in timely manner.  She also manages her 
time well and responds to requests from the officers in 
the Section in a timely manner.  Based on the 
contributions she has made to the Section, she was 
recently promoted to a FSN 10. 
 
With her recent promotion, however, she will be expected 
to perform at an even higher-level. Raajadurrai has the 
potential to do so, but must improve in certain areas. 
The proposed training will enhance her interview, 
briefing and drafting skills.  It will also assist in 
defining what information is important to the USG. 
Raajadurai is also becoming more involved in planning 
certain aspects of VIP visits.  The training provided in 
this area will be used regularly, as Embassy Colombo has 
seen a surge in the number of visits since the advent of 
the peace process. 
 
In addition, a new FSN recently joined the political 
section.  If Raajadurai is selected to attend the 
training, she can use the techniques and procedures she 
learns at NFATC to assist the new FSN in learning his 
responsibilities.  One of Raajadurrai's strengths is her 
ability and willingness to share information with her 
co-workers.  Thus, training for Raajadurai will have a 
multiplier effect within the Political Section. 
 
Mission would also be able to use the time set aside for 
consultations to great use.  The information that 
Raajadurrai provides to the Mission is often shared 
directly with the Department.  The opportunity to meet 
directly with the offices we are reporting to will 
assist her in fine tuning her information-gathering 
towards fulfilling USG interests. 
 
Currently, neither of the two FSNs in the Mission's 
Political Section have had the opportunity to take part 
in a NFATC Political FSN training course.  It is 
Mission's strong belief that providing Ms. Raajadurai 
with political training will immeasurably improve the 
Section's capabilities, thus helping Mission achieve 
U.S. goals in Sri Lanka. 
 
AMSELEM