This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 008015 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: INCIRLIK AND OIF-2:  PROPOSED RESPONSE TO TURKISH 
DIPLOMATIC NOTE 
 
REF: ANKARA 7800 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch.  Reasons:  1.5 (B and 
D). 
 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  See para 4. 
 
 
¶2. (C) On December 19, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
provided us a diplomatic note approving the use of Incirlik 
Air Base for the operation to rotate US personnel and their 
associated equipment in and out of Iraq (reftel), and 
outlining the rules and principles to be applied during the 
operation.  MFA officials have told us a response is needed 
before operations can begin. 
 
 
¶3. (C) The rules and principles address issues concerning the 
status of operation-related US personnel/equipment in Turkey, 
compensation, and overflight clearance procedures.  In the 
past, we and the Turks have had different views about the 
applicability of existing agreements to specific operations 
involving the use of Incirlik Air Base.  In those cases, we 
were able to work out with relevant Turkish authorities 
practical operating procedures to address concerns or 
problems that occurred.  We believe that the rules and 
principles outlined in reftel will allow us to continue this 
practice. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Action requested:  Unless otherwise instructed, the 
Embassy intends to deliver the diplomatic note contained in 
para 5 below to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on Friday, 
January 2, 2003. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Text of proposed diplomatic note: 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Republic of Turkey and has the honor to refer to the 
latter,s diplomatic note number ALGY/2003-316 dated December 
19, 2003, including the enclosure thereto. 
The Embassy wishes to assure the Ministry that activities 
approved therein shall be conducted in accordance with our 
full respect for the sovereign rights of Turkey and our 
commitments under international law, including as appropriate 
the NATO Status of Forces Agreement (1951) and NATO SOFA 
Implementation Agreement between the United States of America 
and Turkey (1954), the Defense and Economic Cooperation 
Agreement (1980) and supplements, and the Tax Relief 
Agreement of 1954 as amended and applied. 
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of the Republic of Turkey the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
 
End text. 
 
 
¶6. (U) This message has been cleared by EUCOM J5 Major 
General Kohler. 
EDELMAN