This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 000555 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOD FOR DEPSECDEF 
COMCFLCC FOR SURGEON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/13/2013 
TAGS: AMED AMGT ASEC KU PTER US
SUBJECT: SMALLPOX VACCINATION PROGRAM FOR DOD DEPENDENTS 
 
 
Classified By: CDA FRANK C. URBANCIC, REASON: 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  See para 4. 
 
¶2. (C) Embassy is set to begin smallpox vaccinations on 
Sunday, February 16.  We understand that DoD has still not 
given its assent to inclusion of DoD dependents in this 
program.  Of the total of approximately 145 US Mission Kuwait 
dependents, over 100 have already requested departure from 
the country under the terms of the Authorized Departure 
status issued by the Department of State on January 30.  More 
are expected to depart in coming weeks, leaving a very few in 
country.  Of these, Embassy anticipates that not more than 
25, and probably fewer than that, will be dependents of DoD 
employees assigned to the Embassy under Chief of Mission 
authority. 
 
¶3. (C) A team of medical technicians from the Department of 
State will visit Kuwait City February 13 - 18 to begin to 
administer smallpox vaccinations to Mission employees and 
dependents who request it.  To date, however, DoD has not 
approved indemnification for its dependent members.  This 
places the Ambassador in an impossible double standard 
situation.  All Mission employees and their dependents are in 
Kuwait doing the work of the people of the United States. 
They all work in the same spaces, live in similar 
circumstances, and share the same risks.  They all deserve 
equal protection against potential bio-terrorism. 
 
¶4.  (C) Action Requested:  To ensure that the very few DoD 
dependents assigned to Kuwait City, fewer than 25 total, 
receive the same treatment and support from the Ambassador as 
those assigned from other agencies, request immediate DoD 
authorization to provide smallpox vaccinations program to DoD 
dependents in Kuwait.  Please advise by immediate cable 
whether this request has been approved or denied in time for 
the team to vaccinate those DoD family members who request it 
NLT Monday, February 17.  We understand that discussions are 
already ongoing on this topic in Washington and we look 
forward to a positive response.  The Ambassador has reviewed 
and approved this message. 
URBANCIC