This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 001058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/01/2013 
TAGS: PREL BM JA
SUBJECT: JAPANESE EMBASSY ADVOCATES ENGAGEMENT WITH BURMESE 
REGIME 
 
REF: A. TOKYO 5569 
     ¶B. RANGOON 1019 
     ¶C. RANGOON 993 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Reftel A conclusion that there is a discrepancy 
between MOFA Tokyo and the Japanese Embassy in Rangoon 
matches our assessment that Japanese Ambassador Miyamoto and 
his senior staff strongly oppose their headquarters on Burma 
policy.  As we noted in refs B and C, Miyamoto, and his 
political counselor, have made clear to us and others in 
Rangoon that they strongly advocate close and unconditional 
engagement with the Burmese regime, in contrast to Tokyo's 
evolving policy in the wake of the May 30 attack on, and 
subsequent detainment of, ASSK. 
 
¶2. (C) Japanese Ambassador Miyamoto recently told COM that he 
plans to personally lobby Diet Members for support in 
reversing the GOJ decision to suspend new assistance to 
Burma.  Miyamoto has made several semi-public comments on 
Japan's new aid policy, mostly recent at a meeting of the 
mini-Dublin Group on August 26, noting his less than 
favorable views on cutting assistance to Burma.  He notes 
wryly that although he has seen press reports on the new GOP 
policy, he has yet to receive official instructions from 
Tokyo (Note: Myamoto will return to Tokyo this week for 
consultations followed by several weeks of personal leave). 
 
¶3. (C) We do not see any evidence that Miyamoto plans to 
cease and desist his campaign to step up engagement with the 
SPDC.  Given upcoming meetings between MOFA Division Director 
Yamanouchi and EAP DAS Daley, and between the Japanese Deputy 
Foreign Minister and Deputy Secretary Armitage, we believe it 
essential for Department principals to be aware of the 
Japanese Embassy's efforts to reverse GOJ policy.  Japan's 
decision to suspend new assistance has weakened the 
confidence of the SPDC generals and presents a more unified 
front on the part of the international community.  Continued 
Japanese pressure is essential to helping our efforts to 
press the regime to release ASSK and begin a meaningful 
political dialogue. 
Martinez