This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 003684 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
AIDAC FROM U.S. MISSION IN ROME 
 
STATE FOR PRM/P AND IO/EDA 
USAID FOR DCHA/FFP/D LANDIS 
USDA/FAS FOR CHAMBLISS/TILSWORTH/GAINOR 
BRUSSELS FOR USAID PLERNER AND PRM REP 
GENEVA FOR USAID/NKYLOH 
 
E.O.  12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAGR PREF AORC WFP UN
SUBJECT:  WFP EMERGENCY (EMOP) APPEAL FOR SOUTHERN AFRICA 
 
REF: (A) HARARE 01534, (B) HARARE 01316, and (C) HARARE 
01345 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. The US Mission in Rome draws your attention to the 
special appeal recently made by the Executive Director of 
the UN World Food Programme (WFP) for donor support to WFP's 
new emergency operation (EMOP) for Southern Africa covering 
the period from July 2003 through June 2004.  The food aid 
appeal is valued at U.S. Dollars 308 million.  End summary. 
 
------- 
Discussion 
------- 
 
¶2. WFP's EMOP 10290.00, valued at U.S. Dollars (USD) 308 
million and involving the provisioning of almost 540,000 
tons of food commodities, provides targeted relief aid to 
6.5 million people in 6 countries of southern Africa, 
namely, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe. 
 
¶3. Recently completed FAO and WFP crop and food supply 
assessment missions that found significant shortfalls in 
cereal production confirm the need for continued support to 
the region.  In addition, the impact of HIV/AIDS is 
exacerbating food insecurity in all 6 countries. 
 
¶4. The EMOP will address the transitional needs of 
populations unable to recover their coping mechanisms and 
resume productive livelihoods.  Assistance will be provided 
through targeted family rations, and particularly vulnerable 
individuals will be reached thorough their participation in 
safety-net activities, food for work and food for training 
activities. 
 
¶5. WFP's appeal is being fully integrated into the United 
Nations Consolidated Appeal for Southern Africa.  In 
addition, UN and inter-agency collaboration has been 
improved by the recent strengthening of the Regional Inter- 
Agency Coordination and Support Office (RIACSO), sharing 
offices with the WFP regional bureau in Johannesburg, 
attending coordination meetings with NGOs, and maintaining 
regular contact with the Consortium for Southern Africa Food 
Security Emergency (C-SAFE).  In addition, WFP continues to 
work closely with the SADC regional vulnerability assessment 
committee, particularly in the analysis of factors 
contributing to regional food insecurity. 
 
¶6. Despite some carryover contributions from the regional 
EMOP 10200.00, many of the commodities will not arrive for 
distribution until next year.  As a result, because serious 
distribution shortfalls will begin to occur in September, 
WFP requests urgently needed confirmed contributions, 
ideally cash contributions, now. 
 
¶7. The project document for this appeal is found on the WFP 
website.  Further details are as follows: 
 
- Data from the CFSAM and VAC assessments forecast an 
increase in cereal production from 5.4 million metric tons 
(MT) in 2001/02 to approximately 6.5 million MT in 2002/03 
in the 6 EMOP countries.  Nevertheless, a cereals gap of 
about 2.4 million MT is projected for 2003/04. 
- HIV/AIDS continues to follow from and generate food 
insecurity.  Those who are vulnerable to malnutrition are 
more susceptible to HIV/AIDS, while households that lose 
breadwinners to HIV/AIDS are more susceptible to food 
shortages.  The overwhelming majority of people infected 
with HIV/AIDS are between 15 and 49, their most productive 
years.  Throughout the region the number of newly orphaned 
children and households headed by the chronically ill are on 
the rise.  Therefore, food aid is critically important in 
bolstering the lives of those infected with HIV/AIDS. 
 
- In Lesotho, food production for 2002/03 at the national 
level has improved from the immediately preceding years. 
HIV/AIDS prevalence among adults is about 31 percent, and 
 
the numbers of new orphans (about 73,000 in 2001 alone) and 
ill-equipped child farmers are mounting. 
 
- In Malawi, poor weather has affected up to 200,000 
families, the most vulnerable of which lack adequate 
purchasing power to meet minimum nutritional requirements. 
The chronic malnutrition rate is 49 percent. 
 
- Mozambique has experienced significant crop failures 
following the worst rains in 50 years and a second 
consecutive year of drought.  In some areas, often because 
logistics challenges ensure that little food reaches the 
most vulnerable populations, the acute malnutrition among 
children from 6 to 59 months has reached the alarming rate 
of 11.2 percent. 
 
- Swaziland is experiencing important disparities in food 
production.  Near-eradication of the local cash crop, 
cotton, and reduced employment opportunities in South 
African mines have led to severe drops in family purchasing 
power.  Swaziland has the second highest HIV/AIDS prevalence 
rate in the world, and statistical projections show life 
expectancy dropping to below 30 years by 2010 if current 
HIV/AIDS trends continue. 
 
- In Zambia, chronic malnutrition is estimated at 53 
percent, one of the highest rates in the world, and life 
expectancy has dropped to 32 years. 
 
- Zimbabwe is facing enormous food security challenges, 
which include HIV/AIDS, crop failures, and collapsing 
markets.  Note: Please refer to US Embassy Harare Reftels A, 
B, and C related to Zimbabwe's crisis and suggested USG 
course of action.  End note. 
 
¶8. The objectives of the WFP emergency operation are to 
prevent severe food shortages, safeguard the nutritional 
well-being of vulnerable segments of the population, and 
preserve, build and restore social structures, human and 
productive assets and safety nets. 
 
¶9. WFP's EMOP for Southern Africa can be found on its 
website at www.wfp.org.  Hall 
 
 
NNNN 
	2003ROME03684 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED