This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LAGOS 000505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
CAIRO FOR POL -- MAXSTADT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/06/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ASEC KDEM NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: HARRY'S MURDER FLAMES PORT HARCOURT 
TENSIONS 
 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 00448 
     ¶B. ABUJA 00449 
 
 
Classified By: CONSUL GENERAL ROBYN HINSON-JONES.  REASON:  1.5 (B & D) 
 
 
. 
 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY.  Marshall Harry's death on March 5 is the 
latest in a series of murders regarded by southern Nigerians 
as political assassinations.  His death has raised tensions 
in the Rivers State capital of Port Harcourt, where the 
leading opposition presidential candidate plns to hold a 
rally tomorrow, March 8.  Harry's death is being interpreted 
in the South as a warning to politicians that some of them 
will try to attain and hold on to power at all costs.  (See 
also septel "WHO WAS MARSHALL HARRY?")  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
------------------------ 
ANPP RALLY MOVES FORWARD 
------------------------ 
 
 
¶2.  (C) ANPP's rally for presidential candidate Muhammadu 
Buhari, organized by Marshall Harry just prior to his death, 
is still scheduled to take place at the Port Harcourt 
Liberation Stadium tomorrow, March 8.  Deputy Police 
Commissioner for Rivers State B.A. Hassan told poloff March 7 
that the police are "prepared for a potential backlash," but 
he does not anticipate there will be a disturbance.  He 
expressed confidence in the ability of his "men on the ground 
to contain any problems" and said they will "meet with the 
political heads to reach an understanding" that the event 
should go peacefully.  He said he expects the leaders will in 
turn talk to their youth supporters to ensure that no 
violence will break out among them. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Despite hopes, the rally may become dangerous and 
peace unpredictable.  A rumor circulated earlier this week 
that youths would burn down the stadium in retaliation for 
the alleged higher fee charged for ANPP's use of the facility 
than that recently charged for a similar PDP function. 
Rumors that the ANPP may display Harry's corpse at the rally 
could create a "volatile emotional situation" and provoke 
supporters to "go on the rampage," as a Halliburton security 
report recently noted.  "The situation can also be hijacked 
by miscreants," they observe. 
 
 
¶4.  (U) ANPP National Chairman Don Etiebet was quoted on 
March 5 as saying, "I want to call on all Nigerians to hold 
the PDP government and Chief Olusegun Obasanjo responsible 
for the gunning down of our members all over the country.  If 
these intimidations and killings continue we have no option 
than to call on all Nigerians to defend themselves" (Reuters, 
"Nigeria opposition chief assassinated." 3/5/03). 
 
 
--------------------- 
PORT HARCOURT ON EDGE 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Human rights groups have reported that there is "very 
strong suspicion in Port Harcourt that the PDP has a hand in 
the killing."  Chris Newsom of Friends of the Ogoni People 
recently said: "Marshall Harry's death is not a bolt from the 
blue.  He had alerted the public of threats against his life 
for some time.  The message people are taking from this is, 
'This is just the beginning.'  People are interpreting the 
act to be one of pure intimidation, as if to say, 'If we can 
take Harry down, nobody is safe.'"  Multiple credible sources 
say armed thugs referred to as "Odili Boys" continue to 
harass political opponents of Governor Odili.  Over the past 
several months, an increasing number of Southerners have been 
echoing Harry's accusation (septel) that the Rivers State 
Government has been directly arming thugs to maintain the 
incumbent's support. 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Human rights activists and Rivers State government 
officials are concerned about their personal safety. 
"Confidence in Port Harcourt regarding the safety of 
political players of all shades is very, very, low," said 
Newsom.  Rivers State Attorney General Aleruchi Cookey-Gam 
told poloff on March 7 that officials "have been advised to 
take proper caution, though the climate has been peaceful 
except for a few pockets.  Overall, it has been better than 
could be expected.  Police are on the alert and working hard 
to maintain peace."  Azibaola Robert, president of the Niger 
Delta Human and Environmental Rescue Organization (ND-HERO) 
met with other human rights groups in Port Harcourt today 
(March 7) and will issue a statement calling for responsible 
parties to "eschew bitterness and violence."  Ledum Mitee, 
president of the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni 
People (MOSOP), will meet today (March 7) with Governor 
Odili.  MOSOP and other groups also plan to air a radio 
statement appealing for public calm. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
INITIAL PROTESTS CALMED DOWN 
---------------------------- 
 
 
¶7.  (C) Official and NGO sources confirmed that the 
atmosphere is "pretty calm" now.  On the night of March 5 or 
early morning of March 6, someone dynamited the private 
medical clinic of the Secretary to Rivers State Government 
Abiye Sekibo, but eye-witnesses say the property suffered 
minor damage.  Press reports said one patient was injured and 
moved to a state hospital.  Most targets have been "property, 
not people," said Newsom.  "A few people have been roughed 
up.  But no one has been killed, to my knowledge," he said. 
 
 
¶8.  (C) On March 5, an estimated five hundred protestors 
marched from Harry's Port Harcourt office through the streets 
toward the airport, carrying signs reading "Who killed 
Marshall Harry?" and "Why him, Marshall Harry?"  As a 
precaution, Halliburton raised its security alert level to 
"high" within Port Harcourt, and reported that some "vehicles 
were burnt and people were brutalized.  A Coca Cola truck was 
seized and the bottles used as weapons.  Despite the presence 
of policemen on the airport road, some groups of rampaging 
youths are targeting and vandalizing any government vehicle 
in sight."  Multiple sources confirm that "a couple" of 
vehicles were burned, including one federal government 
vehicle.  Government vehicles are now absent from Port 
Harcourt streets. Rivers State House of Assembly Speaker 
Rotimi Amaechi described Port Harcourt on March 5 to poloff 
as "calm, but there are lots of rumors, tensions, and threats 
circulating."  Lowering his voice, he added, "I am a member 
of PDP, but I don't like what is happening." Poloff was 
unable to get him to elaborate on this remark. 
HINSON-JONES