This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003603 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR Claire Kaneshiro NEA/ARP, Duncan Macinnes NEA/PPD, 
Robert Persiko ECA/PE/C/PY, CA/VO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO CVIS SCUL KU
SUBJECT: EMBASSY ADDRESSES CONCERNS ON STUDENT VISAS, NSEERS 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: Security concerns in Kuwait this year 
   disrupted traditional preparations to study in the United 
   States. As a counterbalance, PAS and the Consular Section 
   have collaborated on several public affairs initiatives 
   designed to facilitate study in the U.S.  Our Consul has 
   appeared on local television programs, did a call-in program 
   interview with a leading local newspaper, and met with the 
   Kuwait Student's Union to discuss National Security Entry- 
   Exit Registration System (NSEERS) requirements, among other 
   topics.  The Embassy increased student visa content on its 
   website. The Consular Section hosted two `Student Visa Days' 
   during which students were able to apply for visas without 
   appointments. The Consular Section also ensured timely 
   issuance of visas for Kuwaiti high school students 
   participating in an important public diplomacy initiative, 
   the Youth Exchange and Study (YES) Program. Student visa 
   issuances are up about 20% compared this summer compared to 
   last, thanks also to faster turn around on SAO requests. END 
   SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   Security concerns in Kuwait this year disrupted 
   traditional preparations to study in the United States. 
   Many U.S. academic institutions cancelled recruitment trips 
   to Kuwait beginning last fall due to fears of terrorism and 
   war. The Ministry of Education closed schools in Kuwait for 
   almost a month during Operation Iraqi Freedom.  The closure 
   caused many students substantial delays in gaining 
   admissions to U.S. institutions for the fall semester. The 
   extension of the academic year to make up for class time 
   lost during the war also delayed allocation of government 
   scholarships upon which many Kuwaiti students depend for 
   overseas study. 
 
¶3.   PAS and the Consular Section have in the past three 
   months collaborated on a number of initiatives to 
   counterbalance these factors and facilitate study in the 
   United States.  The strategy has been to ensure students 
   could apply with adequate time to complete required 
   clearance procedures before their school start date, while 
   also disseminating information on student visa applications 
   and National Security Entry-Exit Registration System 
   (NSEERS) requirements through speaking appearances by the 
   Consul and through the local media. 
 
¶4.   On May 27 and June 20, Consul Sean Murphy appeared on 
   Arabic and English television, respectively, to answer 
   questions from the public on visa-related issues.  The 
   Arabic venue, a morning talk-show carried locally and on 
   Kuwait's satellite channel, is one of the Gulf's most 
   popular programs. The format was questions from an 
   interviewer interspersed with calls from the public. The 
   station allowed the segment with the Consul to run twice its 
   allotted time due to the volume of calls, most of which 
   focused on visa application requirements and NSEERS.  The 
   appearance on Kuwait's English-language channel followed a 
   similar format and likewise received a large number of calls 
   on these topics. 
 
¶5.   On July 20, Consul Murphy and APAO Kevin Olbrysh 
   visited the offices of leading Arabic daily newspaper Al- 
   Qabas to address directly the concerns of its readers. Phone- 
   in questions ranged over individual visa cases and concerns 
   regarding NSEERS reentry procedures. Between calls the 
   editor of the local section asked follow-up and more general 
   questions.  The local section editor asked about security 
   procedures and specifically about future plans to capture 
   biometric data from NIV applicants, as well as the scale of 
   illegal immigration to the U.S. 
 
¶6.   Al-Qabas the following day published a half-page 
   interior spread covering the session, with a lead-in below 
   the fold on the front page. The first paragraph of the story 
   noted that the capture of biometric data would apply to 
   "Kuwaitis and all individuals from around the world applying 
   for US visas." The coverage positively emphasized the need 
   for security in the U.S. visa process by setting it in the 
   context of illegal immigration and legitimate concerns about 
   terrorism, and noted that Arabs and Kuwaitis are not being 
   singled out. 
 
¶7.   On July 22, the Consul fielded questions at a "freshman 
   orientation" session for around 80 Kuwaiti students who will 
   be departing for studies in the U.S. in the fall. The 
   session was sponsored by the U.S. chapter of the National 
   Union of Kuwait Students (NUKS), and attendees also included 
   a representative from the Ministry of Higher Education and 
   two student union speakers. The Consul met with NUKS board 
   members prior to the session  to discuss concerns about 
   returning students who may not have complied with NSEERS 
   departure requirements. 
 
¶8.   The Consular Section held "open" days for student visa 
   applicants on July 14 and 28, on which applicants for 
   student visas could appear for interviews without an 
   appointment. These dates were announced via press release 
   well in advance and the Government of Kuwait was informed 
   via diplomatic note.  A total of 214 students and their 
   dependents applied for visas on those two days.  Overall, 
   issuance of student visas for June-July 2003 is up about 20% 
   compared to the same period last year, thanks also to faster 
   turn-around on SAO requests. 
 
¶9.   Coinciding with the first Student Visa Day, the Embassy 
   launched a new link on its webpage, "Information for 
   Students".  The link collects in one place information 
   previously available elsewhere on the site and adds 
   additional content of interest to students.  It includes 
   NSEERS requirements in English and Arabic.  The NSEERS 
   information has been given in writing to all applicants 
   known to be subject to the program since its inception. 
 
¶10.  PAS and the Consular Section also worked closely to 
   accommodate early visa interview appointments for seven high 
   school students from Kuwait that will live and study in the 
   US during the 2003-04 academic year under the State 
   Department funded Partnerships for Learning (P4L) Youth 
   Exchange and Study (YES) Program. All students received 
   their visas well before their scheduled departure date later 
   this month. To help publicize the program PAS arranged media 
   coverage for a farewell reception in honor of the students 
   and their parents hosted by the Ambassador and attended by 
   the Minister of Education. 
 
¶11.  COMMENT.  We would like to think we have turned 
   something of a corner on student visas.  In addition, the 
   increase in stability in the region will permit U.S. 
   colleges and universities to again schedule recruiting trips 
   to Kuwait and allow Kuwaiti students to make plans without 
   the disruptions caused this year by the War.  We will 
   continue our efforts to encourage study in the United States 
   and to ensure that students are aware of their 
   responsibilities under NSEERS.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
JONES