This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/23/2013 
TAGS: PBTS PREL PTER PGOV SA YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF INTERIOR ON YEMEN-SAUDI SECURITY 
COOPERATION 
 
Classified By: Charge Alan G. Misenheimer for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Begin summary:  On June 21, Charge met with Minister 
of Interior Alimi to discuss recent developments in 
Yemen-Saudi border security, Red Sea counter-terrorism 
cooperation, press reports of Yemeni terrorist arrested in 
Saudi Arabia, and other issues.  The Charge was accompanied 
by RSO and PolOff.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Yemen-Saudi Arabia Border Security 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  During a 6/21 meeting with Minister of Interior, Dr. 
Rashad Alimi, Charge asked him to discuss the recent 
Yemen-Saudi border agreement and its implications for 
improved border security.  Alimi noted that Yemen-Saudi 
border cooperation is complicated by populations that 
straddle the border and flow freely from one side to the 
other.  The border security agreement between the two 
countries established several committees to manage this 
phenomenon, but controlling the flow of "cars and lambs" 
around the border towns is very difficult.  Smuggling remains 
a major problem; some groups are able to bypass ROYG 
checkpoints crossing from Yemen's Hadramut region into Saudi 
Arabia, and vice versa. 
 
¶3. (C)  Overall, Alimi described Yemen-Saudi border 
cooperation as strong and improving.  The joint committees 
are responsive to changes in the situation and meet whenever 
Yemeni or Saudi Arabia desires.  Since the recent terrorist 
attacks in Riyadh, Alimi feels there is a heightened Saudi 
commitment to security throughout the Kingdom. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Noting that the Minister of Defense was unable to 
attend a scheduled 6/17 meeting in order to deal with a 
security incident near Marib, Charge asked whether terrorist 
suspects had been arrested. Alimi explained that the incident 
was not terror-related, but criminal.  A group of criminals 
in Saudi broke a colleague out of police custody and fled 
across the border into Yemen.  Saudi Armed Forces, not 
police, followed the fugitives about 240 kilometers into 
Yemen, killing one during the exchange of gunfire which 
ensued.  The fugitives car later overturned in the desert. 
The remaining suspects ran off and remain at large.  The 
Minister of Defense went to Marib for talks with his Saudi 
Defense counterpart after this "hot pursuit." 
 
¶5.  (C)  According to Alimi, ROYG considers the incident the 
sort of territorial infringement that underscores the need 
for cooperation.  The ROYG asked the Saudis to ensure that it 
does not happen again, "Yemen will take care of the Yemeni 
side of the border, but we accepted their apology." 
 
¶6. (C)  In response to the Charge's query on recent press 
reports of Yemeni terrorists arrested in Saudi Arabia, Alimi 
noted that two people were arrested with false Yemeni 
passports, but are now believed to be Egyptians.  The ROYG is 
currently seeking the extradition of about 100 Yemenis in 
Saudi Arabia for criminal prosecution. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Qatari and Djiboutian Cooperation 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Alimi indicated that there was no direct CT 
discussions during the recent visits of the Djiboutian 
President or the Qatari Emir to Yemen.  However, Qatar has an 
active  CT agreement with Yemen and works with all its 
neighbors on Red Sea security -- a top ROYG priority.  That 
security requires an effective Coast Guard reporting to the 
MOI.  Alimi then repeated a familiar refrain - Yemen needs 
financial assistance to defray the Coast Guard's $100 million 
plus price tag.  The Saudis have not been forthcoming - 
during Alimi's last trip to the Kingdom, they told him that 
the U.S. should assist the Coast Guard because of Yemen's 
cooperation in the war on terror. 
 
------------------------- 
And Now, About Our Cars... 
------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (C)  Charge thanked Alimi for MOI's commitment to the 
security of American interests in Yemen, and reiterated the 
need for continued vigilance.  Alimi agreed to look into some 
administrative delays that affect Embassy security including 
non-diplomatic license plates for Embassy vehicles and an 
18-car backlog of privately owned vehicles for mission 
personnel at Hodeidah port. 
 
 
MISENHEIMER