This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

210724Z Jul 03S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004544 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH GENERAL STAFF OBJECTS TO EU REFORM PACKAGE 
AIMED AT RESTRICTING MILITARY'S POLITICAL POWER 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 4319 
     ¶B. ANKARA 4367 
     ¶C. ANKARA 4499 
     ¶D. ANKARA 2521 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reason: 1.5 (b)(d). 
 
 
¶1. (U) CNN Turk and NTV news channels report July 18 that the 
Turkish General Staff (TGS) leadership has voiced objections 
to the AK Government about its latest EU-related reform 
package.  According to the reports, TGS opposes the reforms 
because: 1) they "restrict the jurisdiction of the National 
Security Council;" 2) the package would bring the military's 
budget under civilian (Court of Accounts) control; and 3) the 
proposals foresee holding NSC meetings every other month, 
vice the current monthly schedule. 
 
 
---------- 
Commentary 
---------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) In a telephone conversation with us after the news 
broke, AK Vice Chairman Firat was sparse in his comments, 
noting, however, that "we (the Government) are under pressure 
on a number of issues."  In a recent, more private 
conversation reported ref A, Firat noted that TGS is 
attempting to use the controversy surrounding the July 4 
brief detention of Turkish Special Forces (TSF) by U.S. 
troops in Iraq to fan nationalist flames and undercut the 
reform drive.  Firat indicated that TGS Chief Ozkok is facing 
severe pressure from more hawkish elements in the military 
leadership who are trying to make it difficult for Ozkok to 
unseat them. 
 
 
¶3. (S) In a meeting with Polmilcouns July 16, Air Force Maj. 
Gen. Suphi Acar (J-5/Chief of Agreements), confirmed that the 
hard-line/soft-line split within the military is more 
pronounced since the July 4 detention of the TSF.  Moreover, 
hard-liners long concerned about Ozkok's "accommodationist" 
stance vis-a-vis AK and P.M. Erdogan are even more agitated 
since the July 4 incident.  Acar noted that he counts himself 
among those that feel that AK's true agenda is an eventual 
Islamic state (a view echoed to Polmilcouns July 15 by Air 
Force Lt. Gen. Turgut, Acar's boss and TGS Plans/Policy 
Chief).  Ozkok, Acar said, must take a tougher line on AK's 
attempts to diminish the role of the military in the MGK and 
to take control of military spending.   Similarly, given the 
widespread view of USG "support" for AK, many flag officers 
want Ozkok to take a more aggressive line with the Americans, 
too, and feel he capitulated on the Joint Statement.  Acar 
agreed that the premier hard-liners are Army officers:  TGS 
Deputy Chief Gen. Buyukanit and Army Gen. Yalman, NSC SecGen 
Gen. Kilinc, Aegean Army Chief Gen. Tolon, and Lt. Gen. 
Karabay (J-3/Ops Chief). 
 
 
¶4. (C) Cuneyt Ulsever, an influential columnist at the daily 
"Hurriyet," told us July 18 that the NSC issue represents a 
crucial test of AK and of Turkey's ability to continue the 
reform process.  He noted that the military is particularly 
concerned with maintaining the NSC's ability to impose 
discipline on the civilians.  The NSC SecGen oversees 
directly and indirectly hundreds of staffers -- including the 
ASAM think tank headed by Umit Ozdag, who Ulsever asserted is 
on the TGS payroll (note: which we have heard from numerous 
other commentators -- septel).  "I know" for a fact, he 
asserted, that Ozkok himself is not/not driving the 
opposition to the reforms.  Ulsever also noted that the 
opposition CHP is reversing course and opposing further 
reform.  He related how CHP Deputy Kemal Dervis, one of the 
party's more reform-minded members, is now trying to convince 
journalists that AK "is seeking a Sharia state" even though 
Dervis knows better.  (Note: in a July 16 meeting with us, 
Dervis expressed slight "reservations" about AK even as he 
applauded AK's reform push.  end note.) 
 
 
---------------- 
What Will AK Do? 
---------------- 
 
 
¶5. (S) Maj. Gen. Acar asserted that, facing pressure from 
within the military, Ozkok will insist, via his working 
relationship with Erdogan, on diluting these measures to the 
point that the military hard-liners would be satisfied.  Acar 
expressed confidence that Ozkok would prevail, but admitted 
that should AK decline to back down, the TGS Chief would face 
"unbearable" pressure. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Ulsever added that it would be "political suicide" for 
AK to take a step back now, given that it has extended 
Parliament's current session precisely to enact these reforms 
and to demonstrate to an overwhelmingly pro-reform public its 
seriousness of purpose.  Dropping the reforms would also 
potentially wreak havoc with the GOT's EU timetable, and 
negatively effect the EU's report on Turkey due out this 
fall.  Turkey's EU candidacy, Ulsever averred, depends on 
what AK does right now. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) In the interest of helping Ozkok manage relations with 
his hard-liners, AK is showing signs of back-tracking on key 
reform proposals.  As recently as July 11, F.M. Gul assured 
Ambassador that the Government is committed to transforming 
the NSC into a "real" advisory vice governing body (ref B). 
However, we note AK's willingness to temporize to limit the 
extent of confrontation.  Recently they: 1) weakened a 
comprehensive "reintegration" proposal intended to bring 
PKK/KADEK militants down from the mountains (ref C); 2) 
shelved controversial higher education reform bills (septel); 
and 3) have shaded toward a more nationalist line on the July 
4 incident.  AK's approach could represent a tactical 
decision to wait for the outcome of the Aug 1-4 meeting of 
the Supreme Military Council (YAS), in the hope that Ozkok 
will have the wherewithal to ease out some of the military 
hard-liners.  However, as so often in Turkey, biding one's 
time becomes an end in itself (ref D), and might have 
profound implications for Turkey's immediate and EU-related 
future. 
PEARSON