This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 005652 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ TU PHUM
SUBJECT: TURKEY: AMBASSADOR, DEPUTY P.M. SAHIN DISCUSS 
IRAQ, MINORITY FOUNDATIONS 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman. Reason: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In his introductory call on Deputy P.M. 
Mehmet Ali Sahin, the Ambassador underscored the importance 
of U.S.-Turkey relations; said that Turkey could play an 
important positive role in Iraq; and raised concerns about 
minority foundations.  Sahin said the GOT believes it can 
contribute to a stable, prosperous Iraq.  On minority 
foundations, Sahin acknowledged that implementation of 
existing legislation is what will improve the situation of 
the foundations and underscored that the GOT is committed to 
resolving property claims issues. End summary. 
 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
 
¶2. (C) In a Sept. 3 initial call by the Ambassador, Deputy 
P.M. Sahin opened the discussion by seeking the Ambassador's 
initial views of Turkey.  The Ambassador stressed that Turkey 
and the U.S. share strategic goals in the region, including 
in Iraq, and that Turkey's success as a democracy will have 
profound effects for Muslim countries everywhere. 
 
 
¶3. (C) In response, Sahin repeatedly emphasized the 
importance a stable Iraq has for the entire region. 
Stability is in Turkey's interests, Sahin said, and "we are 
cooperating with U.S. to achieve this."  Sahin downplayed the 
views of some Turks that the situation in Iraq is 
deteriorating and that Turkey should not become involved. 
Turkey can contribute positively to establishing a stable and 
prosperous Iraq.  "Once we explain ourselves to the public, 
the Turkish people will be behind us."  The GOT believes the 
U.S. is in Iraq for the right reasons, he claimed. 
 
 
-------------------- 
Minority Foundations 
-------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) The Ambassador then raised minority foundations in 
Turkey, which are part of Sahin's wide-ranging portfolio. 
Noting the GOT's commitment to improve the situation of the 
foundations, the Ambassador recommended that the GOT focus on 
property issues.  Working hard to address the concerns of 
minority foundations, particularly those of the Ecumenical 
Patriarch, will not only improve Turkey's standing as a 
democracy but will also redound to the GOT's benefit with the 
broader American public, including Representatives in 
Congress. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Sahin claimed that the GOT is committed to improving 
the situation of the foundations both for Turkey's own 
democratic development and for Turkey's EU bid.  He meets 
with representatives of the foundations frequently to discuss 
their problems and concerns.  The GOT is now working on 
implementing recently passed legislation that will help 
resolve property claims issues.  The head of the foundations 
general directorate has prepared a progress report on 
implementation, Sahin said.  Although Sahin admitted he had 
not yet read the report, he asserted that the GOT wants 
implementation and if there are problems, it will correct 
them.  Sahin summarized the GOT approach in this way: "we ask 
ourselves: if we are living in a foreign country, how would 
we want to be treated?"  In any case, "these people are 
Turkish citizens; we can't discriminate against them." 
 
 
-------- 
Bio Note 
-------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Sahin has been a long-time Embassy contact as an 
Istanbul M.P. from AK predecessor parties, Refah and Fazilet, 
and earlier as an Istanbul political bigwig (he served 
briefly as mayor of conservative Fatih district and later was 
Refah's party boss for Istanbul in 1994).  He has been an 
open, thoughtful interlocutor -- and one not prone to 
blustering or hyperbole.  Our contacts say Sahin has a 
certain entree to P.M. Erdogan.  Their relationship likely 
grew out of their time working together in Istanbul, where 
Erdogan served as mayor 1994-1998. 
EDELMAN