R 101143Z JUL 03
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8748
INFO GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVES E C R E T  DOHA 001748 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2013 
TAGS: EFIN PTER ECON ETTC QA
SUBJECT: IN-HOUSE VIEWS ON POTENTIAL HAMAS TARGETS 
 
REF: A. KABUL 1810 
     ¶B. STATE 194837 
     ¶C. STATE 193410 
     ¶D. DOHA 2536 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR MAUREEN QUINN FOR REASONS 1.5 (b) AND (d) 
 
¶1. (S) SUMMARY. The organizations named in ref B, Qatar 
Charitable Society (QCS), Sheikh Eid bin Mohammed Charitable 
Society and the Qatari Joint Committee for Relief, are three 
of the four charitable entities in Qatar (the fourth is the 
Qatar Red Crescent Society). The GOQ is committed to 
combating terrorist financing and has demonstrated a strong 
willingness to cooperate with USG efforts. Absent concrete 
information specifically linking these organizations to 
terrorist activity, post has not engaged the GOQ regarding 
them. To designate these organizations now, individually or 
as a group, without apparent cause or justification, would 
send a strong negative signal to the GOQ and the Qatari 
public about the bilateral relationship. END SUMMARY. 
 
QATAR CHARITABLE SOCIETY 
 
¶2. (S) The "United Way" of Qatar, Qatar Charitable Society is 
the largest charitable organization in Qatar and conducts the 
majority of charitable activities and fundraising in the 
country. QCS took decisive measures in late 2002 to prevent 
misuse of funds or other resources for illegal purposes 
(detailed ref D).  These steps included a new focus on 
domestic charitable activities and reorganization of 
management. The GOQ has tightened every aspect of charitable 
oversight without USG prodding. Designating QCS at this time 
would suggest that these efforts were not sufficient or 
effective. Qatar Charitable Society has kept an office open 
in the Palestinian territories given the plight of the 
Palestinian people. This office might have some contacts with 
Hamas. If Washington agencies have specific information in 
that regard, we would want to share it with the GOQ for 
investigations and any appropriate action. 
 
¶3. (S) Additionally, in late 2002 a new QCS Chairman, Sheikh 
Abdulaziz bin Abdulrahman al Thani, was named. In addition to 
his position with QCS, Sheikh Abdulaziz also serves as the 
Chairperson of the Royal Family Council, which has the 
constitutional mandate of investing the nation's ruler. 
Designating QCS could be interpreted as a slur against Sheikh 
Abdulaziz and the ruling al Thani family as a whole. Sheikh 
Abdulaziz works closely with the Organization of Islamic 
Conference Fund for Afghanistan, established in Doha in 2001. 
He is also involved with Microsoft and supported their 
opening an office in the Qatar Science and Technology Park 
this spring. 
 
QATARI JOINT COMMITTEE FOR RELIEF 
 
¶4. (S) Sheikh Abdulaziz bin Abdulrahman also serves as the 
Chairperson of this committee. To the best of post's 
knowledge, this is not an operating charitable organization 
as much as a relief entity that targets specific needs. 
Usually the organization is addressed as the Qatari Joint 
Relief Committee for Afghanistan, Qatari Joint Relief 
Committee for Iraq, etc. GOQ officials have previously 
reported that the Joint Committee is a quasi-government 
entity and donations may be both public and private. 
 
¶5. (S) In the past two years, the Joint Committee has been 
very active in Afghanistan and has recently focused on Iraq. 
The Joint Committee for both was announced publicly along 
with information on how Qatari citizens and others could make 
donations for the specific needs in these countries. 
Fundraising telethons are generally used to solicit initial 
donations. Ref A outlines Sheikh Abdulaziz's recent visit to 
Afghanistan to discuss application of Qatari Joint Relief 
Committee for Afghanistan projects, as well as private and 
GOQ donations, with the Afghan and U.S. officials. 
 
SHEIKH EID BIN MOHAMMAD CHARITABLE SOCIETY 
 
¶6. (S) This, the smallest charity in Qatar, is not well known 
to the Embassy due to its small size. GOQ officials have 
previously reported that the organization does little 
international charitable work. Sheikh Eid bin Mohammad al 
Thani is a royal family member. If Washington agencies have 
significant concerns about this group, post would like to 
have the opportunity to engage key GOQ decision-makers on the 
organization's activities in order to gather more useful 
details. The organization has at least two offices in Doha. 
One office is about a half mile from the Embassy and the 
second is around the corner from the Ambassador's residence. 
Post has not visited either facility to date. Post might also 
be able to develop more information by pursuing some contacts 
with this group. 
 
¶7. (S) COMMENT. Qatar remains a committed and active partner 
in the international war on terrorism and efforts to combat 
terrorist financing. As reported previously, the GOQ has 
repeatedly taken independent steps to control local 
charitable organizations and strengthen oversight over 
foreign donations. These steps have shown tangible and 
immediate results. Post strongly argues against designating 
these three organizations. They are either doing the right 
thing or we have not shared information beforehand with the 
GOQ that allows it to take pre-emptive action. Post believes 
engaging the GOQ directly and privately regarding our 
concerns for these three organizations' connections to Hamas 
is the best way to achieve desired results. 
 
 
QUINN