This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 005118 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR MCISAAC, CA/OCS/ACS/WHA HALDANE, OFDA, 
OBO/PE/DE/CSB DAI OH & HAO BUI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC DR EAIR EWWT SENV SOCI
SUBJECT: EARTHQUAKE SHAKES DOMINICAN REPUBLIC - NO AMCITS 
REPORTED INJURED 
 
¶1. At 12:45 a.m. on September 22, an earthquake measuring 6.5 
on the Richter scale struck the Dominican Republic 
approximately nine miles south of the resort town of Puerto 
Plata and 12 miles north of the interior city of Santiago. 
No AmCit deaths or injuries have been reported by the US 
Consular agent in Puerto Plata or other sources.  Embassy 
contacts and local media are reporting two local deaths due 
to heart attacks but "many" injuries. 
 
¶2. Two hospitals in the northern part of the country have 
been evacuated so that officials can assess the structural 
damage to the buildings.  Schools in Santiago, Puerto Plata 
and San Francisco de Macoris are closed, and many offices and 
businesses in the region are closed.  Damage to the highway 
between Puerto Plata and Santiago is being assessed by local 
public works employees.  The Carol Morgan School in Santo 
Domingo, attended by many Mission children, reported no 
damage or injuries. 
 
¶3. Our contacts in the affected region report major damage to 
some buildings in Puerto Plata, including partial collapse of 
the second story of a government bank; damage to the "old 
pier" putting it out of service for the time being; and 
cracks in an airport terminal serving American Airlines, 
which has canceled all flights.  A "new pier" is still 
available for vessels putting into the port.  A few 
houses/places of business in both cities collapsed or 
suffered major damage, and more buildings sustained cracks or 
other damage to walls, awnings, and billboards.  The tremor 
awakened many people in Santo Domingo, knocked some pictures 
off walls and some items off shelves. 
 
¶4.  Several aftershocks, one of which registered 5.1 on the 
Richter scale, were felt in the early morning hours. 
Officials are warning that aftershocks may continue.  An 
emergency number for the Red Cross emergency center is being 
broadcast on local radio and television stations 
(809-472-0909). 
HERTELL