This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 005198 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/14/2013 
TAGS: ETRD PREL ECIN TU CY
SUBJECT: TRADE OFFICIAL ON CUSTOMS UNION WITH NORTHERN 
CYPRUS 
 
 
REF: NICOSIA 1614 
 
 
Classified by CDA Robert Deutsch.  Reasons: 1.5(b,d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Embassy's August 13 discussion with a 
senior foreign trade official raised questions about how much 
substance there is to the customs union framework agreement 
Turkey signed with the "TRNC" authorities August 8.  Foreign 
Trade Director General for Agreements Tevfik Mengu argued 
that the agreement would have little short-term impact on 
trade, but was designed to harmonize northern Cyrpus' economy 
with that of the EU.  He claimed the EU should not have any 
problem with the agreement, since it refers to "Cyprus" 
rather than to the "TRNC," and therefore is no different from 
other agreements Turkey is negotiating with countries that 
have free trade agreements with the EU.  Embassy's sense, 
shared by local European Commission representatives, is that 
this agreement is largely a political show, unlikely to have 
much economic impact.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) Embassy met with Foreign Trade Director General for 
Agreements Tevfik Mengu August 13 to try to learn the details 
of the customs union framework agreement signed with TRNC 
authorities August 8.  Mengu was evasive, but made the 
following points: 
 
 
-- The agreement has few details, but is meant to provide the 
framework for an eventual customs union agreement; 
 
 
-- Turkish and "TRNC" authorities still have to complete the 
annexes and protocols needed to turn this into a full-fledged 
customs union agreement.  Turkey is in "no rush" to do this, 
and in any case the agreement will not take effect before May 
1, 2004; 
 
 
-- The primary goal is not short-term trade expansion ("they 
have nothing to sell," per Mengu), but to help northern 
Cyprus harmonize its economy with that of the EU, in 
anticipation of Cyprus' accession (i.e. presuming there will 
be a settlement prior to accession). 
 
 
¶3.  (C) When pressed on what this agreement actually will do, 
Mengu responded that "it doesn't say much."  He added that 
Turkey will work with "TRNC" authorities to eliminate tariffs 
on industrial goods and to create a "certificate of origin" 
system in the north.  Mengu explained that goods from 
northern Cyrpus currently come to Turkey without certificates 
of origin.  If meant for re-export, authorities here give 
them Turkish certificates of origin.  Mengu stressed, 
however, that the volume of such exports is miniscule. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Mengu argued that the EU should not have a problem 
with the framework agreement because it refers to "Cyprus," 
not to the "TRNC."   In that sense, he claimed, it is no 
different than the other free trade agreements Turkey is 
negotiating -- based on Article 16 of its Customs Union 
agreement with the EU -- with countries that have signed free 
trade agreements with the EU.  Mengu implied that, by fudging 
the definition of "Cyprus," the agreement would allow the EU 
to pretend the agreement was with the recognized country of 
Cyprus, while allowing Turks to say it is with the "TRNC." 
 
 
¶5.  (C) An Ankara-based Economic Commission representative 
told us his office had many questions about the agreement, 
but could not comment authoritatively until it obtained the 
text.  EC reps plan to meet with Foreign Ministry officials 
August 15 to discuss the agreement and, they hope, obtain a 
copy.  The representative questioned the GOT argument that, 
by referring to "Cyprus" in the agreement rather than the 
"TRNC," it had avoided any legal issues vis-a-vis the EU. 
¶5.  (C) Comment:  Embassy shares reftel's assessment that 
there is not much economic substance to this agreement, as 
does the EC rep with whom we spoke.  It appears to be largely 
a political gesture that Turkey will attempt to justify 
internationally with the argument that it is simply helping 
northern Cyprus prepare for EU membership if there is a 
settlement. 
DEUTSCH