This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS THE HAGUE 002859 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
EB/TRA/OTP FOR M.WALKLET 
USEU FOR J.KESSLER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON ETRD NL
SUBJECT: CONVERSATION WITH DUTCH ON EUROPEAN AVIATION 
SAFETY AGENCY 
 
REF: STATE 267840 
 
¶1.     (SBU) On November 14, EconCounselor and EconOff met 
with Rene Fennes, Director of the International Affairs 
Bureau at the Directorate General for Civil Aviation, 
Netherlands Ministry of Transport.  (Note:  Fennes attended 
the Oct. 1-2 U.S.-EU aviation talks on behalf of the 
Netherlands.  End Note.)  EconCounselor raised the points in 
ref A demarche that concern a requirement for member states 
to send a diplomatic note covering the transfer of certain 
safety-related competencies to the EASA.  Fennes said the 
Netherlands intends to send the U.S. a note in the near 
future, and that such note will contain "no surprises."  The 
delay stems from the Netherlands' unwillingness to adopt the 
language that was suggested by the Commission.  The Dutch 
viewed Brussels' template language as being too slanted 
toward the EASA.  Fennes explained that the Dutch are not 
alone in their concerns about the Commission's recommended 
letter.  Fennes reiterated his government's commitment to 
ensuring a robust EASA that functions as an "equal partner" 
to its U.S. counterpart.  He said he hoped the Italians would 
put EASA framework legislation on the agenda soon. 
 
¶2.    (SBU) On the subject of U.S.-EU air services talks, 
Fennes praised the approach of the U.S. delegation as 
"constructive," "open-minded" and inclusive of all parties' 
concerns.  On the issue of Heathrow, Fennes said the Dutch 
respect British views, but at the same time want to ensure 
that decisions are not made to the detriment of EU-wide or 
Netherlands-specific concerns.  Fennes commented that he 
would appreciate more information on the U.S. position on the 
so-called "free-rider" principle. 
 
¶3.     (SBU) TSA/DHS recently completed an inspection of 
Amsterdam Schiphol Airport.  During a discussion of the 
Schiphol certification, Fennes admitted he finds this USG 
practice to be very helpful in raising the safety/security 
standards of airports worldwide.  He hopes the Commission 
will someday have a similar European certification for 
airports. 
RUSSEL