This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001684 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:   DECL: 09-29-13 
TAGS: PREL PTER EINV US CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Ambassador Lunstead presents credentials to 
President Kumaratunga 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead. 
Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) The Ambassador, accompanied by the Deputy Chief 
of Mission, called on President Chandrika Bandaranaike 
Kumaratunga on the evening of September 26 at her 
official residence to present his credentials.  In a 
very brief ceremony (according to Sri Lankan practice, 
no formal remarks were made or handed over), the 
Ambassador presented his letters of credence and the 
recall letter of his predecessor and conveyed to the 
President the warm greetings of President Bush and 
Secretary Powell.  The President then invited the 
 
SIPDIS 
Ambassador to join her for tea in a neighboring room. 
 
¶2.  (C) The Ambassador opened the half-hour tea 
discussion by noting that he was honored that the 
President had taken the time to receive him on what must 
be a difficult day for her -- the 44th anniversary of 
her father's assassination.  The Ambassador told the 
President that her personal record of tragedy, with 
family members murdered and a bomb attack on her that 
left her injured, illustrated the tremendous sacrifices 
she had endured in her pursuit of peace in Sri Lanka. 
She should be proud of this commitment.  The President 
expressed her thanks for the Ambassador's sentiments. 
She said that it indeed was a difficult day.  She said 
her security detail "prevailed on me" at the last minute 
not to attend the anniversary commemoration in honor of 
her father at Horagolla outside of Colombo since there 
were concerns about LTTE "penetration" of the event. 
 
¶3.  (C) The President concurred that her family history 
was a sad one but noted that it paralleled the sad 
history of the country.  "Our history shows a lack of 
strong leaders.  When we've had strong leaders they've 
been killed."  She then reviewed her efforts to promote 
peace and political devolution over the years and 
commented with some bitterness that if the current Prime 
Minister had supported her efforts to accomplish what he 
is now trying to accomplish, "maybe we would have peace 
by now." 
 
¶4.  (C) President Kumaratunga turned to the LTTE and 
told the Ambassador that the firm U.S. line against the 
terrorist organization had, in her view, clearly had a 
strong impact on the group.  "You have held firm. 
Others, like the EU and Norway, are too easily 
hoodwinked."  The Ambassador reviewed for the President 
the mechanics of the U.S. Foreign Terrorist Organization 
(FTO) process and told her that the group would be 
redesignated in early October with a public 
announcement.  "Good," the President said.  "I agree 
with you."  She noted with some vehemence that LTTE 
leader Prabhakaran in particular was not to be trusted. 
"Too many are duped by him." 
 
¶5.  (C) The Ambassador told the President that he was 
accredited to the entire Sri Lankan government and that 
he looked forward to working with both her and the Prime 
Minister and with all other elements of the Sri Lankan 
government.  He noted that the U.S. stands ready to help 
in any number of ways to promote peace and economic 
development but that only Sri Lankans can do what needs 
to be done.  The President said she appreciated the 
Ambassador's comments and agreed completely.  She nodded 
enthusiastically when the Ambassador said he would be 
honored to meet with her on a regular basis to discuss 
the issues of the day.  "I look forward to it," 
President Kumaratunga said, suggesting they might meet 
on a monthly basis. 
 
¶6.  (C) The conversation concluded with a discussion of 
U.S. investment in Sri Lanka.  The Ambassador gave the 
President an overview of both actual U.S. commercial 
activities and the many expressions of interest from 
U.S. companies.  The President was particularly 
interested in potential U.S. involvement in the 
information technology sector and told the Ambassador 
that she would like to meet with Microsoft executives 
during their upcoming visit. 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT.  The President was gracious and cordial 
although her bitterness quickly bubbled to the surface 
when the LTTE and the UNP government were discussed. 
Chief of Protocol commented that the half-hour 
discussion was unusual, as such events normally last no 
longer than ten minutes.  The Ambassador will follow up 
to establish a regular schedule of monthly meetings with 
the President.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD