This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002917 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/19/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL TX IR NL UNGA UNGA UNHRC
SUBJECT: DUTCH ON HUMAN RIGHTS:  IRAN, CHR, TURKMENISTAN 
 
REF: A. THE HAGUE 2861 
     ¶B. SECSTATE 316541 
     ¶C. SECSTATE 313411 
     ¶D. SECSTATE 321136 
     ¶E. THE HAGUE 1857 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Mary E. Daly Reason 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request.  Please see para 5. 
 
¶2. (C)  Dutch human rights concerns continue to run parallel 
to those of the United States.  Specifically, the GoNL will 
co-sponsor the Canadian UNGA 3rd committee resolution on the 
human rights situation in Iran (ref A).  The Netherlands, 
which according to MFA contacts has been the most out-spoken 
member at EU meetings on the need for an UNGA resolution on 
the human rights situation in Iran, continues to encourage 
other EU countries to co-sponsor.  The GoNL is pleased the 
U.S. has also decided to co-sponsor this resolution. 
 
¶3.  (C) On the subject of reform of the UN Commission on 
Human Rights (CHR), the Netherlands views itself as a leader 
in advocating constructive reform.  The Netherlands continues 
to work with Canada on the establishment of a CHR WEOG 
rotation scheme.  (Note:  While pressing for this rotation 
scheme among WEOG members and particularly EU member states, 
some MFA insiders are nevertheless doubtful of its success. 
End Note.)  The Netherlands, which will return to the CHR in 
the spring, is also actively reviewing ways in which to 
reform the CHR.  MFA Senior Policy Advisor Hans Docter was 
very pleased to see the non-paper in ref C.  The clear, 
targeted approach is in line with the strategy that the Dutch 
MFA is developing internally, and which they hope to share in 
the near future with EU members.  (Note:  PolOff asked that 
Docter also share the Dutch strategy document with the U.S. 
when complete.  End note.)  Docter and PolOff agreed that 
Dutch relationships in Africa, both bilaterally and while 
acting on behalf of the Irish and Luxembourg presidencies of 
the EU in 2004 and 2005, put it in a good position to 
encourage African democracies to put forth good candidates. 
The Dutch hold the EU Presidency in the second half of 2004. 
 
¶4.  (C) Regarding Turkmenistan, the GoNL was happy to learn 
of the U.S. decision to co-sponsor the EU resolution (ref D). 
 The Dutch are also pleased with the level of cooperation 
between the U.S. and Dutch delegations in New York on this 
issue.  Docter opined that increased U.S. attention to 
Turkmenistan and the decision to co-sponsor this resolution 
have gone a long way to diminish EU resentment of the U.S. 
for not giving enough attention and support to human rights 
issues that are of importance to the EU. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Action request:  The Dutch, who were pleased with 
the increased US-EU cooperation in advance of the 59th CHR, 
would welcome human rights consultations in either capital to 
discuss 60th CHR goals.  Please advise. 
SOBEL