This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 001973 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DS/DSS,DS/ATA/TR, DS/AF/IP 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER NI
SUBJECT: ATA TRAINING FILLS GAP IN GON SECURITY PREPARATIONS 
 
REF:  A. STATE 209313  B. ABUJA 1770 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  From October 27 through 31, 2003 Embassy Abuja hosted 
an ATA sponsored Weapons of Mass Destruction and Postal Management 
Training Course. The course was well received by the GON with 
significant representation from practically all elements of the 
federal government.  All participants were first responders or 
decision-makers within the GON.  Upon conclusion of the training 
many participants expressed their appreciation to the USG for 
providing this opportunity. Practically all participants requested 
add on instructions not only in WMD but other security related 
training areas including combating of terrorism.  End summary 
 
 
¶2. WMD was the buzz word for the participants of the ATA 4715 
Weapons of Mass Destruction and Postal Management Training Course 
taught at the Sheraton Hotel from October 27 through 31, 2003.  If 
you did not have an ATA black carry bag bearing the Diplomatic 
Security Service badge and seal you were a nobody.  Although day 
one started off with approximately 61 participants registering, 
the GON was able to mobilized a significant countrywide 
representation of the WMD brotherhood and on day two, 93 
participants from a multitude of WMD first responder agencies 
eagerly arrived to receive their instructions. 
 
 
¶3. The GON participants, representing a broad spectrum of first 
responders and strategic planners, readily admitted their 
organizations were ill prepared to meet the WMD chemical and 
biological threat.  Representatives from the Nigerian Police 
Service, Nigerian Fire Service, Nigerian Postal Service, Federal 
Ministry of Environment, Emergency Medical Service Headquarters, 
the State House home of the Presidency, Abuja Bomb Squad, 
Airforce, Navy, Army, State Security Service and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs admitted GON lack of preparedness in this key 
area. 
 
 
¶4. Most participants expressed their appreciation for the WMD 
training to RSO Abuja.  Several participants informed RSO Abuja 
they were responsible for creating and implementing a GON WMD 
National Plan that requires approval by the Presidency.  One 
senior Nigerian Police Service official mentioned that the 
lack of a viable WMD plan was the weak link in their security 
arrangements currently in progress to ensure the safety and 
security of over 32 Heads of Government and the Queen of England 
scheduled to visit Abuja for the Commonwealth Heads of Government 
Summit to begin December 3, 2003.  One high ranking official 
working at the Ministry of Environment admitted this 
training closes a very big gap in the GON security planning. 
 
 
¶5. During the post graduation ceremonies, practically all 
participants from all services and ministries requested additional 
add on training, especially in the area of combating terrorism. 
 
 
¶6. As a result of this course, the GON will be receptive to future 
training offers.  Therefore, post requests consideration be given 
to offer the GON additional WMD add on training.  In addition to 
the additional WMD add on training, RSO Abuja requests that ATA 
VIP personal protection training also be offered to the GON.  RSO 
Abuja advises that once the New Embassy Compound opens O/A March 
2005, the profile for this mission will rise considerably.  It is 
only a matter of time before a personal protection detail will 
need to be implemented on a full time basis for the Chief of 
Mission. If the ATA VIP personal protection training is offered, 
RSO Abuja requests funding to accompany the contingent for their 
course of training. 
 
 
¶7. Post would like to thank the key players and trainers Darcus 
Halmilton, Neill Oster, Eric Sorchik, Paul Argo, Daniel Peterlick, 
and Robert McDonnell for a superlative performance and a job well 
done. Meese