This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 003421 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DOC/BIS FOR RCUPITT 
DHS FOR ABACHELLER 
ROME FOR CUSTOMS ATTACHE 
DOE FOR ASCHEINMAN AND DMARTIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM AMGT ETTC KSTC JO
SUBJECT: EXBS PROPOSED ACTIVITIES FOR JORDAN 
 
REF: STATE 113776 
 
¶1.  (u)  Post concurs with EXBS cooperative activities 
proposed reftel, and expects the GOJ will react favorably to 
the proposal. 
 
¶2.  (u)  Post recommends the following amendments to the 
proposed programs: 
 
--  For FY 02 funds, we note that item (d), "Licensing 
Workshop," is proposed as a one-time program.  We expect that 
the workshop will be an excellent start to a training regimen 
for GOJ officials slated to take on licensing 
responsibilities, but we do not think it will be sufficient 
to train them fully.  We recommend repeating the training 
program every six months, using whatever FY funds are 
appropriate, to ensure that GOJ staff are comprehensively and 
continuously trained.  Similarly, item (k), "Computer Data 
Analysis," should be offered on a regular basis to ensure 
staff are regularly and properly trained. 
 
--  For FY 03 funds, we recommend similarly that training 
under item (d), "X-Ray Van and Associated Training," be 
offered on a regular basis instead of as a one-off.  In 
addition, post has received requests from senior ASEZA 
customs officials over the past months requesting immediate 
additional training on existing x-ray equipment in Aqaba 
port.  If possible, we recommend adding a regular training 
program for existing x-ray equipment at the earliest possible 
availability and regularly thereafter. 
 
¶3.  (u)  Post looks forward to working with the EXBS team 
over the workplan period.  We note, however, that a program 
of the ambitious scope proposed would place extraordinary 
pressure on Post resources, both in ECON and GSO.  In order 
to ensure that the program gets the appropriate level of 
administrative support, we recommend Washington consider 
identifying and contracting a long-term in-country EXBS 
advisor or locally-hired logistics assistant who could 
coordinate the various program activities from Amman.  Post 
also would welcome coordination with USAID Jordan's customs 
program, which has focused in part on enforcement and 
intelligence issues with Jordanian customs. 
BERRY