This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

050951Z Jun 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000965 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Department for D (Gastright), INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC, SA 
(Camp, Waller), SA/PD (Brennig, Irwin, Scensny), SSA/PAB, 
SSO (pass to D) 
Tokyo (Hara, Bryan) 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY (JUNE 5):  TOKYO CONFERENCE 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  In the run-up to the Tokyo conference, June 5 
coverage is apprehensive.  Will the LTTE go to Tokyo?  Will 
the conference, donor contributions, and the peace process 
itself be adversely affected if the Tigers aren't there? 
Headlines are anxious.  Vernacular editorialists are silent 
on the issue, but one English daily dilates on a recent 
survey suggesting that 86 percent of the Sri Lankan public 
supports "a negotiated settlement."  So what?  "It is 
incumbent on everyone," says the editorialist, "to stand up 
and be counted.  Civic organizations everywhere need to 
channel the people's energies ... lest the spoilers of 
peace wrest the initiative in moves to charter the future." 
End summary. 
 
----- 
¶2.  Headlines. 
----- 
 
DAILY MIRROR (independent English daily) is pessimistic, 
saying "LTTE again rejects PM's plan, but ready for talks" 
and "Tigers refuse to budge." 
 
DAILY NEWS (government-owned English daily) quotes a chief 
GSL negotiator, G. L. Peiris:  "Resumption of direct talks 
[is] vital for compromise." 
 
DINAMINA (government-owned Sinhala daily) wants it both 
ways.  "Donations would not be affected even if LTTE does 
not come to Tokyo," it reports, then proceeds to quote "EU 
special delegates" as saying:  "LTTE participation in 
Confab is extremely vital." 
 
LANKADEEPA (independent Sinhala daily) simply reports: 
"Prime Minister leaves for Tokyo Conference Tomorrow ... 
will lead Sri Lanka Government delegation...." 
 
SUDAR OLI (independent Tamil daily) has Peiris holding a 
plum to the north and east:  "Aid received at Tokyo 
Conference is also for North and East with Tigers' 
initiative - Minister G. L. Peiris" 
 
Both THINAKARAN (government-owned Tamil daily) and 
THINAKKURAL (independent Tamil daily) have LTTE leader S. 
¶P. Tamilselvan saying that the LTTE is "prepared to go to 
Tokyo ... if assurances are given through Norway regarding 
Interim Administration...." 
 
And VIRAKESARI (independent Tamil daily) leads with 
another, but more enigmatic, statement from Tamilselvan: 
"Tigers have not completely rejected participation in the 
Tokyo Conference." 
 
----- 
¶3.  Editorials 
----- 
 
Under the headline "How the people could help out" the 
DAILY NEWS (government-owned English daily) commented: 
 
Excerpts: 
 
One thing which continues to provide hope for the future is 
the substantial public backing for "peace by peaceful 
means"....  According to the ... latest survey, public 
support for a negotiated settlement of the ethnic conflict 
stands at an encouraging 86 percent, indicating that the 
majority of Lankans is continuing to be solidly behind the 
current peace endeavor.... 
 
The need ... is great for a profound awakening of the 
public conscience, covering North, South, East and West. 
It is incumbent on everyone ... to stand up and be counted. 
Civic organizations everywhere need to channel the people's 
energies for beneficial, purposive change, lest the 
spoilers of peace wrest the initiative in moves to charter 
the future. 
 
Close excerpts. 
 
----- 
¶4.  Radio/Television 
----- 
 
Radio and television newscasts report only that a "top- 
level delegation" will represent Sri Lanka in Tokyo.  As 
MTV (independent English telecaster) puts it:  "Heading the 
top-level delegation will be Prime Minister Ranil 
Wickremasinghe.  The delegation consists of Finance 
Minister Choksy, Economic Reforms Minister Milinda 
Moragoda, leader of SLMC Rauf Hakeem, and G. L. Peiris." 
 
----- 
¶5.  Web sites 
----- 
... nothing new. 
 
WILLS