This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 001515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM PINR NI
SUBJECT: GON REMOVES POLICE PROTECTION FROM OFFICIALS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED, NOT FOR PUBLICATION ON THE 
INTRANET OR INTERNET. 
 
 
¶1. (U) The Inspector General of Police's Office announced 
August 21 that, on orders from the Presidency, it would 
greatly reduce the use of police as bodyguards.  Bodyguards 
have been limited to the President, Vice President, Ministers 
and Ministers of State, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, 
Senate President and Deputy, Speaker of the House and Deputy, 
Secretary to the Federal Government, Head of the Civil 
 
SIPDIS 
Service, Chairman of the Independent Corrupt Practices 
Commission, President of the Court of Appeal, Governors and 
their deputies, Chief Judges of States, and chairmen of local 
governments and their deputies.  This leaves out numerous 
Special Advisors to the President and Vice President, the 
majority of the National Assembly, and most judges, in 
addition to numerous private individuals ranging from 
businessmen to political godfathers. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Senate President Wabara expressed concerns that 
Nigerian politics has too many violent elements, and said the 
Senate would look into the issue.  The opposition All 
Progressives Grand Alliance Party protested that, under the 
new rule, officials elected and sworn in after disputed 
elections would keep their security.  Those candidates 
petitioning against them would have none.  The party warned 
that "intimidation, harassment and indeed assassination of 
these (opposition) political leaders shall commence." 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) COMMENT: On its surface, the move to reduce the 
number of police bodyguards and escorts is laudable.  The 
police force in Nigeria is stretched thin, and continued 
private use by citizens to demonstrate their wealth and 
self-perceived status -- in line with Nigerian tradition -- 
also leads to allegations of corruption.  Below the surface, 
however, Nigerian democracy, and indeed society at large, is 
often a violent affair.  Assassination of political figures 
is a too-common occurrence, as the murders of Bola Ige, 
Barnabas Igwe, and Marshall Harry (among others) over the 
last two years demonstrate.  Removing police protection could 
put many politicians, especially in the opposition, at 
greater risk of harassment, intimidation and assassination. 
ROBERTS