This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T THE HAGUE 001595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/20/2013 
TAGS: PREL EU IS NL PK
SUBJECT: DUTCH CANDIDATE FOR EU MIDDLE EAST ENVOY 
 
Classified By: POL COUNSELOR MARY E. DALY FOR REASONS 1.5 B AND D 
 
¶1.  (U) Noting that Marcel Kurpershoek is one of two 
finalists to replace Angel Moratinos, we want to share our 
impressions and some biographic details.  Kurpershoek 
currently is resident in Pakistan, where he serves as Dutch 
ambassador to Pakistan, Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, 
Turkmenistan, and Tajikistan.  Previously, he headed the 
MFA's middle east bureau. He also has served in Damascus, 
Cairo, Riyadh, and Brussels. Kurpershoek is widely respected 
for his expertise in the Middle East.  He taught at Leiden 
University and has published frequently, including a book 
based on his experiences living with Bedouins in Saudi 
Arabia, and several works on Arab literature. 
 
¶2.  (S/N) In Pol Counselor's last conversation with 
Kurpershoek before his departure for Pakistan, Kurpershoek 
expressed great sympathy for the Palestinians.  Although he 
obviously disapproved of terrorism as a political tool, he 
cited the very difficult conditions under which Palestinians 
live and their hopelessness as naturally leading to 
terrorism.  Similarly, he was of the opinion that we were 
expecting more from Arafat than Arafat could possibly 
deliver.  The onus, he said, was on PM Sharon to stop 
settlements and offer some hope to the Palestinians for a 
political settlement.  Some of Kupershoek's statements no 
doubt were deliberately calibrated to jolt the American pol 
counselor.  That said, you can assume that if he gets the 
post, his bias will be at least slightly toward the 
Palestians.   The Israeli DCM (protect) in The Hague put it 
succinctly, "he has the right curriculum vitae for the job 
and the right contacts but I personally would not be happy. 
He is not the best on even handedness and is not the Dutchman 
the Israeli embassy would like to see in the job."  According 
to the Israeli DCM, Kurpershoek's contacts with the Israeli 
left are particular good.  Kurpershoek is allegedly the man 
behind the efforts of former FM van Aartsen to start up 
"secret talks" in The Hague among Israelis and Palestinians 
early in 2002. 
 
¶3. (S/N)  A senior official at the MFA says that the Dutch 
government hopes Kurpershoek gets the job in order to 
strengthen the Dutch role in EU deliberations on the Middle 
East.  The Dutch government overall has been a very helpful 
voice within the EU for keeping EU policy on the Middle East 
in line with that of the U.S. and for ensuring a balanced 
approach toward Israel.  FM de Hoop Scheffer is considered 
"pro-Israel," and the government has successfully stopped 
several efforts in parliament to ban the transport of weapons 
to Israel via Schiphol. 
SOBEL