This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 003787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/12/2013 
TAGS: PREL IS TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY TRYING TO SUPPORT THE MIDDLE EAST ROADMAP 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 3507 
 
 
Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch.  Reason: 1.5 (b)(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Since late May, numerous meetings with GOT officials 
and press reports suggest Turkey is seeking to develop a 
constructive approach on Middle East issues, offering to host 
an MEPP (and a separate OIC) conference in Turkey and sending 
appropriate, reform-minded messages to Iran and Syria 
(reftel).  PM Erdogan recently spoke with Israeli PM Sharon 
and Palestinian PM Abu Mazen to encourage them to pursue 
their peace efforts and to indicate Turkey's willingness to 
assist.  In response, Israeli PM Sharon indicated an interest 
in arranging a Roadmap meeting in Turkey. 
 
 
¶2. (C) In recent meetings with us, Erdogan, FM Gul, and TGS 
Chief Gen. Ozkok, indicated that Turkey wants to work with 
the U.S. in the Middle East.  Israeli foreign and defense 
ministers recently visited Turkey while President Katzav is 
expected here in July.  Announcement of a pending visit to 
the region by Gul, with a follow-on visit this autumn by 
Erdogan currently under discussion, comes as MFA 
Undersecretary Ambassador Ugur Ziyal visits Washington to 
discuss ways to rebuild the U.S.-Turkey relationship.  In a 
recent public address, FM Gul stressed the GOT's intention to 
continue good relations with Israel and the Palestinians and 
contribute to the process toward peace. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
The Roadmap and the Arafat Question 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Nevertheless, there are still some discordant notes. 
GOT officials balk at freezing out Arafat, whom they still 
regard as the democratically elected head of the Palestinian 
"state."  The immediate effect of this is a Turkish impulse 
to consider meetings not only with GOI officials and Abu 
Mazen, but Arafat as well.  Gul's Special Advisor at the MFA 
Gurcan Turkoglu told us it is important to maintain Abu 
Mazen's support among Palestinians and not create a separate 
pole of support around Arafat through strict isolation. 
 
 
¶4. (C) We have let our political and MFA contacts know 
clearly a meeting with Arafat would be seen negatively by the 
USG.  The Turkish response has been ambiguous.  Publicly 
unraveling the GOT dilemma, Muharrem Sarikaya, a leading 
columnist in the establishmentarian "Hurriyet" newspaper, 
wrote that Turkey "could not exclude Arafat from the peace 
process, but hoped he would withdraw" on his own accord. 
 
 
-- In a recent meeting with us, MFA Middle East DG Safak 
Gokturk replied that Turkey is aware of USG concerns but will 
"do what (it) will do." 
 
 
-- Other conversations suggest the new perspective from above 
may not yet have filtered down to others.  Ruling AK Party 
M.P.s queried whether it would be feasible to meet Abu Mazen 
and Arafat simultaneously; Justice Minister Cemil Cicek, the 
government's spokesman, expressed surprise to us about that 
the U.S. would react negatively if Turkish leaders visited 
Arafat. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Turkey wants to work with the USG on regional issues. 
Nevertheless, the difficulty with changing traditional views 
of Arafat reflects Turkey's own calculations about realities 
on the ground in the West Bank and Gaza. 
PEARSON