This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ROME 005473 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2013 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IS SY IT UN
SUBJECT: ITALY: SYRIA SEEKS HIGHER LEVEL DIALOGUE WITH 
US/RENEWED RELATIONS WITH ISRAEL 
 
REF: ROME 05363 
 
Classified By: POL M/C COUNTRYMAN FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: During recent closed talks with the Italian 
MFA, Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Walid Muallem expressed a 
desire to improve US-Syrian relations by developing a higher 
level dialogue on a more equal footing. Muallem said that a 
settlement with Israel is the best strategic option for 
Syria. Hezbollah could not be destroyed, but Syria was doing 
its best to control the organization and felt it could be 
rendered insignificant if a true agreement is reached with 
Israel. Syria wants to participate in bilateral or 
multilateral discussions with the US on Iraq. The meeting did 
not appear to us to reveal anything new, but the Italians 
believe it may offer the USG an opening to test Syria's 
willingness to cooperate more effectively in the region. A/S 
Burns' counterpart, Amb. Ricardo Sessa, will ask for the USG 
view of the Syrian points when he meets Burns in Rome 
December 9. End Summary 
 
¶2.  (C) Pol M/C met with MFA, Eastern Mediterranean Office 
Director, Luca Ferrari to follow up on the November 27-28 
Syria-Italy meeting held in Rome. The meeting originated from 
MFA Mediterranean and Middle East Director General, Ricardo 
Sessa's recent trip to Syria during which the Italians urged 
the Syrians to do more in relation to Israel and extended an 
invitation to come to Rome to conduct closed talks to explore 
meaningful actions. (reftel) 
 
¶3. (C) The Syrian delegation was headed by Deputy Foreign 
Minister Walid Muallem and the Italian delegation was headed 
by U/S Alfredo Luigi Mantica. Ferrari indicated that the 
Syrian's principal message was to improve US-Syrian relations 
by developing a higher level dialogue on a more equal 
footing. Ferrari stated that the meeting was open ("more 
relaxed and informal than the Syrians have ever been") and 
that the Syrians declared a desire to work with the US and 
the international community in order to achieve progress. The 
meeting focused on the Syrian-Israeli peace process, 
Hezbollah, and Iraq. Ferrari stated that the Syrians wanted 
the Italians to deliver messages on the above issues to the 
US and were hoping to receive a response from the US via the 
Italians. 
 
Peace Process 
-------------------- 
¶4. (C) The Syrians stated that a settlement with Israel is 
the best strategic option for Syria. They expressed a 
willingness to restart negotiations with Israel based on the 
border demarcation of July 4, 1967. Although not presented as 
a precondition, the Syrians expressed the futility of any 
talks if there is no agreement on the border. If Israel 
agrees to the 1967 border, the Syrians said they would be 
ready to pick up the dialogue based on what was already 
achieved up to the Shepherdstown agreements. Ferrari also 
reported that the Syrians expressed their desire to sign 
agreements and normalize relations with Israel regardless of 
the continuing issues with Palestine, Iraq and the rest of 
the region. Muallem expressed concern that PM Sharon would 
not negotiate with Syria. Ferrari replied that, although this 
may be true in the Palestinian case, the Syrian front may be 
one of the only areas where Sharon could demonstrate progress. 
 
Hezbollah 
---------------- 
¶5. (C) The Syrians stated that they did not consider 
Hezbollah a terrorist organization, but recognized it as a 
powerful and influential political force. The Italians 
responded that regardless of what the Syrians say, Hezbollah 
acts like and is considered a terrorist group by Italy, the 
US, and many other states. According to Ferrari, the Syrians 
did not argue the issue and continued the discussion stating 
that Hezbollah could not be destroyed and that they were 
doing their best to control the organization. The Syrians 
went on to state that the group could be rendered 
insignificant if a true agreement is reached with Israel. 
 
Iraq 
-------------- 
¶6. (C) The Syrians expressed a readiness to participate in 
bilateral or multilateral discussions with the US on Iraq. 
The Syrians stated that, although they are willing to pursue 
a higher level dialogue with the US, they do not feel 
obligated to participate. They stressed that they will only 
be willing to maintain a dialogue with the US and help in 
Iraq if they receive fair treatment from the US. Ferrari 
indicated that the Syrians perceive the US as a bully who 
 
 
threatens and dictates. The Syrians expressed a desire to be 
part of a comprehensive dialogue on Iraq and feel they can 
offer many resources and information on dealing with Iraq and 
terrorism. They do not feel the current dialogue is 
productive and seek improved strategic talks with the US. Pol 
M/C stated that bilateral talks do exist. What the Syrians 
are after is exchanges with higher level officials. 
 
MFA Impressions 
------------------------- 
¶7. (C) Ferrari closed stating that he felt Deputy Foreign 
Minister Muallem had come to Rome with the authority to speak 
frankly and delivered sincere messages. Ferrari believes the 
Syrians genuinely want to progress on the peace process with 
Israel, assist in the war on terrorism, and participate in 
the reconstruction of Iraq. Deputy Foreign Minister Muallem 
repeatedly stated that Syria was misunderstood and was not 
being given the respect and fair treatment it expects in 
order to participate as a full partner in the region. Ferrari 
believes the Syrians want to restart strategic talks on more 
cordial terms and at a higher level with the US and want to 
protect their own interests through cooperation with the US. 
 
Comment 
------------------- 
Although interesting, Ferrari's read-out does not seem to us 
different from what the Syrians have been saying publicly and 
privately to us. By using the Italians as the go between the 
Syrians can maintain a distance while getting their message, 
genuine or not, delivered to Washington via a more credible 
channel. The Italians also wish to play a more important role 
in the region and wish to be viewed as the key negotiator 
who, if things work out, can take credit for bringing parties 
together and moving regional peace and stability forward. 
SEMBLER 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME05473 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL