This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 002847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, JUNE 21-25: US-KUWAIT 
RELATIONS; TERRORISM; "GULF ROAD MAP;" NORMALIZATION WITH 
ISRAEL; PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: In widely reported remarks, an Islamist MP 
lashes out at former Kuwait oil minister Sheikh Saud Al- 
Sabah for the latter's establishment of a committee to 
collect donations for the families of coalition soldiers 
killed in Iraq. MP Busairi goes on to denounce normalization 
of relations with Israel saying, "We reject reconciliation 
with the traitorous Jews, the grandchildren of monkeys and 
pigs." In reply, a liberal commentator writes: "Let us 
together work to oust all candidates hostile to the United 
States who are attempting to turn our country into a base 
for the `New Taliban' and terrorists." A poll conducted by a 
leading paper this week indicates that 90% of respondents 
feel the government and National Assembly are corrupt, and 
only 35% support political rights for women. 
 
Al-Watan reports that letters of support for its editor-in- 
chief, Mohammad Al-Jassim, who faces criminal charges for 
criticizing the ruling family, were sent to Secretary of 
State Colin Powell by prominent US institutions. The paper 
also highlights the State Department Human Rights Report on 
Kuwait. One writer believes that an American "Gulf Road Map" 
will soon be announced to energize political and social 
reform in the Gulf. 
 
In an editorial titled "Between Disregard and Attention," a 
liberal commentator writes that US neglect of Kuwait seems 
to be ending with recent visits by General Tommy Franks and 
Assistant Secretary of State William Burns. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News stories: This week, Al-Qabas and Kuwait University 
conducted a poll of "Kuwaiti voters" on various issues, and 
Al-Qabas published the results on their front pages this 
week. According to the poll, 90% of respondents believe that 
the government and the National Assembly are involved in 
corruption; 65% oppose giving women the right to vote or to 
stand for office; and 65% oppose the appointment of a woman 
as a minister. 
 
Sheikh Jaber Al-Duaij Al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti Ambassador to 
Saudi Arabia, denies local media reports that appeared 
earlier in the week of scores of Kuwaitis being detained in 
Saudi Arabia for links to Al-Qaeda, saying that no Kuwaiti 
is in police custody in Saudi Arabia, Al-Rai Al-Aam reports. 
 
Al-Seyassah and Al-Qabas ran a front-page advertisement this 
week from the Kuwaiti Committee for Consoling the Families 
of Coalition Forces who Lost their Lives while Liberating 
Iraq, soliciting donations for the families of Coalition 
soldiers killed in Iraq. 
 
On June 25, Al-Watan reports on its front page that 
according to the State Department's Annual Human Rights 
Report, the Human Rights situation in 15 Middle Eastern 
countries, including Kuwait, is "dangerous." 
 
Al-Watan reports that the Chairman of the Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace and the Editor-in-Chief of Foreign 
Policy magazine sent a joint letter to Secretary of State 
Colin Powell expressing great concern over the Kuwaiti 
government's decision to refer Mohammed Al-Jassim, editor-in- 
chief of Al-Watan newspaper, to the Public Prosecutor. 
 
Al- Watan and Al-Anba report that Islamist MP Mohammed Al- 
Busairi stated in a public electoral seminar that "we reject 
reconciliation with the traitorous Jews, the grandchildren 
of monkeys and pigs," and that the new National Assembly 
will announce a war on Islamists under the pretext of 
combating terrorism. 
 
On June 23, Al-Qabas reports that the Council of Ministers 
is considering a strategy to "reform and upgrade" the 
educational system in Kuwait. 
 
On June 22, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Sheikh Dr. 
Mohammed Al-Sabah said that a new date for a visit by 
President Bush to Kuwait will "be agreed upon by both 
parties," Al-Rai Al-Aam reports. 
 
All newspapers report on June 25 the one-day visit of 
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs 
William Burns' to Kuwait. 
 
¶3. "Why Saud Al-Sabah?" 
Liberal Political Science Professor at Kuwait University, 
Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (6/24): 
"Political Islamist groups in Kuwait continue to attack the 
person of Sheikh Saud Naser Al-Sabah. [because] he is the 
only member of the ruling family to have publicly stated. 
that political Islamist groups pose the gravest danger to 
Kuwait's future and that of the region. However, not one 
Kuwaiti, or any of Kuwait's leaders, have supported his 
position. Sheikh Saud and other Kuwaiti youths are proud of 
their ties to the United States, because they realize that 
Kuwait's higher interests demand the cementing of these 
ties. manifested by the establishment of friendship 
societies with the United States, the latest being the 
Kuwaiti Committee for Consoling the Families of Coalition 
Forces who Lost their Lives while Liberating Iraq. Let us 
together work to oust all [parliamentary] candidates hostile 
to the United States who are attempting to turn our country 
into a base for the `New Taliban' and terrorists." 
 
¶4.  "Sheikh Saud Al-Sabah's Crime" 
Hasan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Qabas (6/24):  "If 
Saud Al-Sabah, former Minister of Oil and of Information, is 
the Ahmad Chalabi of Kuwait-- meaning America's man in 
Kuwait-- as described by [Islamist and member of the Islamic 
Constitutional Movement] MP Mohammed Al-Busairi, then, the 
[Islamic] Constitutional Movement is the National Command of 
the Fundamentalist ruling Baath Party. [T]he establishment 
of the Kuwaiti Committee for Consoling the Families of 
Coalition Forces who Lost their Lives while Liberating Iraq 
intensified the [Islamic] Constitutional Movement's 
resentment [of Sheikh Saud]. Saud wanted to compensate for 
deficit in Kuwait's position toward the United States which 
has long called for political and economic reforms in Kuwait 
and the need to curb the powers of the [Islamic] 
fundamentalists. The sad result is evident for everyone to 
see: the marginalization of Kuwait by the American 
administration, as when President Bush abstained from 
visiting here." 
 
¶5.  "The First Deputy Prime Minister is not the President" 
Former Secretary General of the Kuwait Democratic Forum, 
Ahmed Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (6/23): 
"The post of the First Deputy Prime Minister is a fabricated 
position. that has no constitutional basis.   Therefore, it 
is not constitutionally valid for a Prime Minister to 
delegate to a `first deputy' the task of forming a 
government. The constitution must be followed in letter and 
in spirit. if, as we allege, we are a state comprised of 
institutions and based on a constitution." 
 
¶6.  "The Gulf Roadmap" 
Ahmed Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (6/21): 
"The American administration is preparing to announce a 
`Gulf Roadmap' modeled on the Israeli-Palestinian one, 
according to the former Secretary General of the GCC, 
Abdullah Bishara. On a recent visit to the United States, he 
met with American officials, one of whom was Elizabeth 
Cheney, the Vice President's daughter, who is overseeing 
Colin Powell's famed Middle East Partnership project. [The 
Gulf Road Map] may soon be announced to urge the GCC 
countries to speed up political, educational and economic 
reforms according to a `liberal' perspective. This would be 
part of a wider project, to rearrange the region, in which 
the overthrow of Saddam's regime was just the first phase." 
 
¶7.  "Punishment Alone is not enough" 
Khadyer Al-Anizi wrote in independent Al-Qabas (6/25):  "A 
regional campaign to counter terrorism, must begin with 
severe punishment against those who exploit our religion. 
It must begin by solving all societal problems, and by 
thinking of comprehensive development. This can be achieved 
through a new curriculum, the acceptance of different 
cultures, building of civil society and establishing a state 
based on strong institutions and justice. Only then will 
extremists be defeated." 
 
¶8.  "Between Disregard and Attention" 
Ahmed Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (6/25): 
"For a while now, official American statements have ignored 
Kuwait, either by ignoring Kuwait's role in the war to 
overthrow Saddam, or by failing to mention `Kuwaiti 
democracy.' But, during the past few weeks, a change has 
occurred. American attention toward Kuwait was renewed. 
This was manifested through a phone call from President Bush 
to the Kuwaiti Foreign Minister. Then, there were words of 
praise by General Tommy Franks during a ceremony where he 
was decorated with a medal. Thirdly, according to `Al-Watan 
Al-Arabi' publication, is charging National Security Adviser 
Condoleezza Rice to oversee Kuwait's internal affairs and 
future. The publication also claims that Secretary of State 
Colin Powell will soon visit Kuwait. Finally, Assistant 
Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, William Burns 
 
SIPDIS 
visits Kuwait today to deliver important messages. This 
increased attention must carry within its folds some 
entitlements which may be of dimensions no less great than 
the previous disregard." 
 
 
URBANCIC