This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 002627 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ JO
SUBJECT: INCREASING NUMBERS OF DIPLOMATIC PERSONNEL SEEKING 
TO RETURN TO BAGHDAD FROM JORDAN 
 
REF: STATE 114629 
 
Classified By: Charge Gregory L. Berry.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) Over the past week, Embassy Amman, Task Force West, 
units deployed in Iraq, and CENTCOM HQ have worked jointly to 
facilitate the movement of several foreign diplomatic convoys 
into Baghdad from Amman, following requests from those 
diplomatic missions (see list para 3) asking for guidance 
and/or assistance with such travel.  Our standard response 
has been that the U.S. military has declared the 
Amman-Baghdad Highway to be permissive, although random acts 
of banditry have occurred and coalition forces are not in a 
position to provide escorts to diplomatic convoys.  We have 
noted that in Baghdad security is less firm, that the 
coalition is unable to provide security for specific 
diplomatic properties, and diplomats going there must assume 
a certain amount of risk. 
 
¶2. (C) Despite our efforts to discourage them, all the 
diplomatic convoys that intended to travel did so -- 
apparently as a result of decisions made in capitals.  In 
each case, we (through Task Force West and CENTCOM HQ) passed 
on all the particulars we received to U.S. military units 
forward-deployed in western Iraq.  The foreign diplomats who 
have returned have done so for two stated purposes: (1) to 
check on the status of their diplomatic property in Baghdad 
and (2) to re-open their missions and/or provide consular 
services  to their nationals in Iraq.  Common questions that 
have arisen include:  (a) Whether the U.S. military would 
provide any protection to their personnel either en route to 
or in Baghdad; and (b) who/what is the appropriate point of 
contact for them in Baghdad when they arrive.  We will convey 
information contained in reftel with missions that contact us 
from this point forward regarding prospective travel to Iraq. 
 
 
¶3. (C) To date, diplomats from the following countries have 
traveled to Baghdad from Amman, or intend to do so shortly: 
Jordan, Spain, Vietnam, Thailand, People's Republic of China, 
Japan, Germany, Korea, Singapore, and Nigeria.  In addition, 
the Dutch mission here asked if the coalition could provide 
transport into Baghdad for one Dutch diplomat who is 
recovering from a compound leg fracture and cannot make the 
difficult 12-hour drive from Amman. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: Since the decisions to reopen missions to 
Iraq are made in capitals, we have been unable to dissuade 
any diplomatic travelers from going to Baghdad.  We would 
appreciate clarification of reftel indication that coalition 
forces on the Jordan-Iraq border will in future prevent 
foreign diplomats from entering Iraq without prior 
authorization.  If this is the case, we would appreciate an 
explanation of the approval process (including initial points 
of contact) so we can explain it to would-be travelers in 
Amman. 
BERRY