This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 001996 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/20/2013 
TAGS: PREL LI NI
SUBJECT: TAYLOR: MIXED SIGNALS BREEDS PROBLEMS 
 
 
REF: ABUJA 1937 
 
 
Classified by CDA Roger Meece.  Reason 1.5 (b/d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: MFA Permanent Secretary Hart told the CDA 
November 20 that the GON appreciated USG clarifications 
regarding Charles Taylor and the recent measure authorizing 
$2 million related to the SLSC indictment against him. 
Nonetheless, Hart observed the issue is getting a good deal 
of ongoing play in Nigeria, and he is concerned that 
perceptions of a growing rift between the USG and GON 
regarding Liberia poses risks for the Liberian peace process 
and regional affairs in general.  Indeed, he noted that a 
"series of measures" that appear to signal divergence between 
the two countries could create problems in the general 
bilateral relationship.  While the CDA reiterated that the 
USG continues to feel that Taylor should ultimately answer 
for his actions, the CDA and Hart concurred that that the GON 
and USG share a common goal, i.e., ensuring Taylor does not 
undermine Liberian peace nor regional stability generally, 
and that close cooperation between the two governments should 
be maintained. Hart confirmed FM Adeniji is prepared to 
discuss Taylor during requested meetings in Washington next 
week. End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) In a November 20 meeting with MFA Permanent Secretary 
Amb. Daniel Hart, CDA sought to ensure that there were no 
misunderstandings regarding recent legislation authorizing $2 
million in relation to Sierra Leone Special Court (SLSC) 
indictee Charles Taylor.  CDA noted widespread press reports, 
much of it misreporting the measure as a $2 million "bounty" 
in violation of international law, and an overt challenge to 
Nigerian sovereignty.  CDA emphasized that while the USG 
continues to believe that Taylor will need to answer for his 
actions in Liberia and the region, we also very much 
appreciated the GON's leadership and continuing contribution 
to resolve the conflict in Liberia.  The USG in no way wants 
to encourage illegal actions in Nigeria.  Hart expressed 
appreciation for the explanation, also welcoming the public 
USG statements in Washington and Nigeria following the 
initial press reports about the measure.  He stated that the 
lack of any official GON comment or protest about the matter 
was in fact attributable to the USG public clarifications, 
and the GON's own understanding of the Congressional 
initiative.  Expanding, Hart observed that the U.S. and 
Nigeria share a common agenda, specifically to ensure that 
Taylor does not undermine the Liberian transition government, 
nor continue to contribute to regional instability.  Hart 
courteously but pointedly observed that Nigeria had much 
involved, and thus a great deal to lose (comment: by 
implication, arguably more than the U.S.), should Taylor 
succeed in playing a destabilizing role. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Hart mused that the issue continues to garner a great 
deal of attention and comment.  He said that in fact he had 
been listening to a Nigerian radio talk-show early the same 
morning which featured the $2 million authorization as the 
principle topic.  The GON welcomed close cooperation with the 
U.S. which had been invaluable to unblock the Liberian peace 
process; however, many Nigerians are confused by "mixed 
signals" coming from the U.S.  This, he asserted, begins to 
create the impression of divisions between the USG and the 
GON, and that in turn creates problems for the GON and 
potential new risks for the Liberian peace process.  Taylor 
sympathizers could, in fact, exploit such perceived 
divisions.  The CDA concurred that the US and Nigeria share a 
common goal.  Taylor undoubtedly continues to have the will 
and capacity to create major problems in Liberia and the 
region.  He must not be allowed to do so. 
 
 
¶4. (C) The CDA advised that there are additional 
Congressional initiatives related to Taylor.  While details 
and draft text are not yet available, there could be 
implications for USG assistance programs.  Hart asked if 
measures being discussed proposed reductions or suspension of 
aid.  The CDA affirmed that could be the case, but cautioned 
that any language included in new legislation would warrant 
careful review to determine actual impact and options.  Press 
reporting would, however, undoubtedly seize on the headline 
value of any new legislation.  Hart nodded, saying that this 
would be a very unfortunate development, as a "series of 
measures" in Washington would be widely seen as a further 
divergence of USG and GON policies, problematic for the 
bilateral relationship and for regional affairs.  He repeated 
that USG and GON interests relative to Taylor are essentially 
the same.  Strong cooperation is needed between our 
governments, not apparent public widening differences.  CDA 
agreed that effective cooperation is important, and pledged a 
close continuing dialogue whatever might emerge from the 
legislative process. 
 
 
¶5. (C) In the course of the discussion, Hart mentioned that 
FM Adeneji had already left for New York, with the hope of 
continuing on to Washington for meeting(s).  CDA confirmed 
that we are checking possibilities regarding appointments for 
the Minister and the accompanying Attorney General. 
Information about the Washington schedule could be passed via 
the Nigerian mission in New York.  In response to a question, 
Hart acknowledged that Adeniji anticipates that Taylor and 
Liberia would arise as subjects in any discussion, and is 
prepared to talk about them.  Hart also said at different 
points that bringing Taylor to Nigeria was not a widely 
supported move in the country, and that Nigeria would not 
want to hold on to Taylor without end.  He did not respond, 
however, to the CDA's invitation to comment about any GON 
thinking about moving Taylor out, or responding to a Liberian 
request in that regard.  He confined himself to saying that 
he had heard no discussion on the subject, and observing that 
Bryant's government in Liberia has said nothing about Taylor 
to the Nigerians much less signaling a desire for any 
particular action. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Comment: While Hart professes that he, FM Adeniji, and 
President Obasanajo have understood USG actions and policy 
regarding the $2 million measure, he appeared very concerned 
by the prospects of what could be seen as a growing USG/GON 
rift over Taylor.  The Nigerians maintain a strong a 
continuing military and political engagement in Liberia, and 
an active if not dominant political position in many regional 
issues.  It will be very much in our interests to maintain a 
close and collaborative relationship.  End comment. 
MEECE