This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 ABUJA 001340 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/06/2013 
TAGS: PINR PGOV PREL KISL NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF MEMBERS OF THE 
NEW CABINET AND ECONOMIC ADVISORS PART 2 
 
REF: ABUJA 1329 
 
 
 CLASSIFIED BY CHARGE DAWN M. LIBERI; REASON: 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
 
¶1. (C) This is the second of Post,s biographic cables on 
newly appointed GON ministers.  This cable focuses on the 
President,s new economic team.  According to Embassy sources 
and press reports, President Obasanjo is promoting his 
economic team as a new generation of internationally 
respected technocrats.  Nonetheless, several PDP insiders 
have told Econoffs that Minister of Finance Okonjo-Iweala and 
several economic advisers will likely not last long because 
they are seen by many in the Cabinet as outsiders.  A 
Minister of State confirmed that Obasanjo is seeking 
international credibility with these new appointments but 
will likely let his new appointees flounder as soon as they 
have met their public relations usefulness. 
 
 
Minister of Finance and Economy: Dr. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) A career bureaucrat, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala was likely 
appointed to her position by President Obasanjo because of 
her contacts in and understanding of the Bretton Woods 
Institutions and international reputation as a competent 
administrator.  Some observers believe Okonjo-Iweala will 
have a short tenure at Finance because many see her as an 
outsider too removed from Nigeria's politics to survive. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Okonjo-Iweala threatened to resign in July for two 
reasons.  One, President Obasanjo wanted to transfer the 
control of the Budget and Planning function from the Ministry 
to the Presidency.  The other was the designation of certain 
ports for clearance of certain categories of imported goods 
rather than giving the importers freedom to choose the ports 
through which to bring in their goods.  The Minister withdrew 
her resignation letter only after some assurances from the 
President that she would have more monitoring power. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Praised by World Bank President James Wolfensohn for 
her competence and professionalism, Okonjo-Iweala will likely 
serve as Obasanjo's point person on debt relief with the 
United States and Paris Club.  She will also likely act as 
Obasanjo's chief negotiator with the Bank on its Nigeria 
strategy for macroeconomic stability, improved systems for 
budget formulation and execution and progress in overhauling 
public procurement. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Okonjo-Iweala joined the World Bank's Young 
Professionals Program in 1982.  From 1982 to 2000, she worked 
as an Economist and subsequently managed the East Asia, 
Africa and Middle East portfolios.  Okonjo-Iweala is a board 
member of several NGOs and think tanks including the African 
Institute for Applied Economics, Enugu, Nigeria, which she 
co-founded.  Okonjo-Iweala has participated in numerous 
international conferences where she frequently speaks on 
development issues confronting low-income countries 
especially in Africa.  Dr. Okonjo-Iweala initially served the 
Obasanjo Administration in 2000, when she took a leave of 
absence to help Nigeria in managing its $28 billion foreign 
debt, culminating in the setting up of the Debt Management 
Office (DMO). 
 
 
¶6. (U) Mrs. Okonjo-Iweala graduated with an A.B. Magna Cum 
Laude in Economics from Harvard University (1977) and holds a 
Ph.D. in Regional Economics and Development from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  In the last three 
years, she has published several papers in development 
journals and co-chaired a task force that examined how the 
World Bank Group and the donor community can strengthen their 
assistance to the poorest low-income countries. 
 
 
¶7. (U) Born in Ogwashi-Uku, Delta State, 49-year-old 
Okonjo-Iweala is married to Nigerian surgeon and Emergency 
Physician Ikemba Iweala and has four children.  Okonjo-Iwela 
speaks English and several African Languages. 
 
 
Minister of State for Agriculture: Bamidele Dada 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
¶8. (U) Bamidele Dada was likely appointed to his post because 
of his competence and extensive background in agriculture. 
Until his nomination, Dada was the Food Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) representative for Africa.  Prior to 
working with FAO, Dada served in Nigeria's Federal Ministry 
of Agriculture for 21 years.  Dada has written and spoken 
extensively on methods for improving African agriculture 
output. 
 
 
Minister of Aviation: Isa Yuguda 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶9. (C) Competent and goal-oriented, Isa Yuguda is not an 
aviation expert and was likely appointed to his position 
because of his economic experience and close connection to 
senior PDP officials.  Yuguda told U.S. officials in mid-July 
that he wanted to improve relations with the United States 
through the Department of Transportation, the FAA and the 
Embassy.  He told Econoff that his main priority would be 
improving Nigeria's aviation safety and security (and the 
achievement of Category I Status). 
 
 
¶10. (U) Born in Bauchi State, Yuguda was Minister of State 
for Transport from 2001 to 2003.  He was also Managing 
Director/Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of NAL Bank PLC after 
his predecessor, Mr. Shamsudeen Usman, was appointed Deputy 
Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria.  Yuguda became one 
of NAL's branch managers at the age of 26 and was promoted to 
bank MD at the age of 35.  By his own account, he was the 
youngest MD in Nigeria's history.  Yuguda flaunts his wealth 
with a fleet of luxury cars, beautiful homes and over 1,000 
head of cattle.  One on one, Yuguda is a quick read, engaging 
and charismatic. 
Ministry of Aviation, Permanent Secretary: Peter Okunromade 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
¶11. (U) A well-respected career technocrat, Reverend Canon 
Peter Okunromade has received high-marks from the Nigerian 
press and Ministry of Aviation colleagues for his quiet and 
effective leadership. 
 
 
¶12. (U) Okunromade graduated from the University of Lagos, 
with a B.S. in Business Administration in 1972.  He worked 
briefly for Shell Oil Company of Nigeria between from 1968 to 
¶1969.  He then joined the Nigerian civil service, working his 
way up through the ranks in the 1970s and 1980s.  He was 
appointed Director, Planning Research and Statistics of the 
Federal Capital Authority in 1988.  Before assuming his post 
at the Ministry of Aviation, Okunromade served as Director 
General of the Federal Ministry of Women and Youth 
Development from 2001 to mid-2002. 
 
 
¶13. (U) Okunromade, an Anglican Church Minister, was born in 
1944 in Ogun State.  He enjoys golf, singing and photography. 
 He is married with children. 
 
 
Minister of Commerce: Alhaji Idris Waziri 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶14. (C) Former Nigerian Ambassador to Pakistan and career 
diplomat Idris Waziri was a surprise choice by President 
Obasanjo to head the Ministry of Commerce.  He is 
well-connected in the PDP of Taraba State and wanted to 
contest in the gubernatorial election against incumbent Jolly 
Nyame.  Vice President Atiku personally persuaded Waziri to 
drop his campaign, and this appointment is compensation. 
 
 
Minister of Communications: Chief Cornelius Adebayo 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
 
¶15. (C) Cornelius Adebayo is a respected politician, 
technocrat and former Governor of Kwara State.  He was likely 
appointed by President Obasanjo to gain another political 
ally in Kwara State and because of Adebayo is Yoruba, but not 
part of the Yoruba Afenifere organization that is often 
opposed to Obasanjo. 
 
 
¶16. (U) Adebayo graduated from Ahmadu Bello University and 
the University of Ghana (Legon) in the 1960s.  Adebayo then 
was a lecturer at the former University of Ife (now Obafemi 
Awolowo University) in 1969.  He later founded the Department 
of English at Kwara State College of Technology (Now Kwara 
Polytechnics).  From 1973 to 1975, Adebayo was Commissioner 
for Education in Kwara State and later headed the Department 
of Information and Economic Development, respectively until 
he went into politics and was elected Senator in 1979.  The 
Minister was in the National Assembly until 1983, when he was 
elected Governor of Kwara State, only to be ousted three 
months later when the military dissolved Nigeria's Second 
Republic. 
 
 
¶17. (U) In 1993, Adebayo shunned a ministerial offer by 
Abacha's military regime, having been involved in 
pro-democracy activism.  Abacha later detained him in Calabar 
Prison, along with Chief Enahoro for championing Nigeria's 
return to democratic government.  In 2000, when the AD needed 
a respected and pragmatic politician to lead it, they 
appealed to Adebayo to accept chairmanship of the party.  He 
declined the offer. 
 
 
¶18. (U) Adebayo, who holds the traditional titles of Balogun 
of Alla and Jajunmola of Oke-Onigbin, was born on February 
24, 1941 in Igbaja.  Married with six children, the Minister 
enjoys sports and traveling. 
 
 
Minister of Culture and Tourism: Franklin Ogbuawu 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
¶19. (U) Ambassador Franklin Ogbuawu is a former local 
government chairman and customs officer.  In 2003, he ran for 
governor of Ebonyi State on the ANPP ticket and left the 
party during the election process, which resulted in the 
incumbent, Dr. Sam Egwu retaining the governorship.  He was 
then rewarded with an ambassadorship to Greece. 
 
 
Minister of Education: Fabian Osuji 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶20. (U) Professor Fabian Ngozi Osuji was a member of the SDP 
political machine and lost several elections to probable 
machinations by former President Babangida and Senator 
Nzeribe.  He most recently was teaching at the University of 
Nigeria, Nsukka, where he was also chairman of the Governing 
Council. 
 
 
Minister of Environment: Bala Mande 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶21. (U) Colonel Bala Mande, former military Governor of 
Nasarawa State, ran this year on the PDP ticket for Governor 
of Zamfara State where he lost to the incumbent Sanni Yerima. 
 Mande alleged widespread electoral malpractice as reasons 
that led to his loss in the election.  His appointment was 
likely a compensation for his loss in the last election. 
Mande was Minister of State for Internal Affairs (1999-2003) 
during Obasanjo's first term, and is close to National 
Security Advisor Aliyu Mohammed. 
Minister of Agriculture: Alhaji Adamu Bello 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶22. (C) Alhaji Adamu Bello likely retained his portfolio 
because of his political connections to Vice President Atiku; 
both of whom are from Adamawa State.  It is widely thought 
that the Vice President influenced Bello's 2001 appointment 
as Minister of Agriculture because Bello was a close business 
partner to the late Shehu Yar'Adua, Atiku,s political 
mentor.  Bello joined Habib Bank * owned by Yar'Adua and his 
family * in 1983 as Deputy Managing Director and served as 
Chairman of the Board prior to becoming Managing Director in 
¶1988.  Embassy sources stated that his reappointment to the 
Ministry was disappointing because he has not been an 
effective advocate of agriculture during the last two years. 
For example, agricultural productivity has stagnated and 
agriculture input prices, including fertilizers, have 
increased dramatically. 
 
 
¶23. (U) The Minister attended Mayo Belwa Primary School, 
Government Secondary School in Yola, and Ahmadu Bello 
University, Zaria.  He also attended the University of 
Pittsburgh and Harvard University.  He started his 
professional career at the New Nigerian Development Company 
(NNDC).  In addition to his interests in Habib Bank, Bello 
holds significant shares in the Halal Fountain Hotel in 
Kaduna and Intercity Bank. 
 
 
¶24. (C) A Hausa-Fulani Muslim born on May 20, 1951, Bello is 
married and holds the title Dan Iyan Adamawa.  He shies away 
from political discussions and is more comfortable talking 
about economic and business matters.  Despite his 
shortcomings as an administrator, Bello is an intelligent, 
friendly, engaging and articulate interlocutor.  Bello does 
not have a strong background in agriculture and often defers 
to his senior staff for expertise.  In talks with diplomats, 
the Minister often tells his listener what they want to hear. 
 
 
Minister of State for Finance: Nenadi Esther Usman 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
 
¶25. (U) Nenadi Esther Usman was the Commissioner for Women 
Affairs in Kaduna State and Governor Makarfi's Campaign 
Coordinator. 
 
 
Minister of Health: Professor Eyitayo Lambo 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶26. (U) Eyitayo Lambo is an economist whose firm has 
coordinated British donations for improving health services 
in Africa. 
 
 
Minister of Housing/Urban Development: Mobolaji Osomo 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
¶27. (U) Osomo was a former Minister of Education under the 
Interim National Government (ING).  She has been touted as 
having won the 1999 Alliance for Democracy gubernatorial 
ticket in Ondo State but lost out to the tide of anti-Abacha 
sentiments that held sway in the South-West at the time.  She 
later joined the PDP. 
 
 
Minister of Industries: Mogaji Mohammed 
--------------------------------------- 
¶28. (U) Mogaji Mohammed, a former Permanent Secretary in four 
different state ministries in Kaduna State, was most recently 
Ambassador to Saudi Arabia.  Mogaji is also the father-in-law 
of the current governor of Kaduna State, Mohammed Makarfi, 
and has old ties to the PDM political machine. 
 
 
Minister of Labor/Productivity: Husaini Zanuwa Akwanga 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
 
¶29. (U) A career civil servant, Husaini Zannuwa Akwanga was 
the Secretary to the Governor of Nasarawa State from 1997 to 
1998, and was Permanent Secretary for Internal Affairs from 
1999 until retiring in March this year. 
¶30. (U) Akwanga began his career as a classroom teacher, in 
Nasarawa State in 1961 and continued teaching until 1984 when 
he was transferred to the Federal Capital Development 
Authority as Chief Inspector of Education. 
 
 
¶31. (U) Born on March 3, 1944, Akwanga graduated with a B.A. 
(1976) and an M.Ed (1978) from Amadu Bello University. 
 
 
Minister of Power and Steel: Liyel Imoke 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶32. (U) Liyel Imoke was the former Special Advisor on 
Utilities, and was also a Senator in the early 1990's.  He 
was the head of a taskforce charged with revamping the 
Nigerian Electric Power Authority.  Much of the 
responsibility for the lack of improvement in performance 
during the last four years belongs to him. 
 
 
Minister of Science and Technology: Turner Isoun 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
¶33. (C) Professor Turner Isoun, first named Minister of 
Science and Technology in September 2000, probably retained 
his position in part because he is an ethnic Ijaw from the 
politically volatile Bayelsa State.  He also has extensive 
experience in the field and holds a Ph.D. in Veterinary 
Pathology.  His home was destroyed during the Odi incident in 
¶1999.  In 2000, Isoun replaced Chief Ebitimi Banigo, also 
from Bayelsa, who was the first Minister in Obasanjo's 
Cabinet to resign. 
 
 
¶34. (U) Isoun first met President Obasanjo in Nairobi 10 
years ago.  Isoun was pioneering a pan-African journal on 
science and technology called Discovery Innovation and 
Obasanjo was in Nairobi in connection with the Africa 
Leadership Forum.  He interacted with Obasanjo on a number of 
occasions at international academic conferences.  Isoun was 
surprised when Obasanjo asked him to join the cabinet after 
Banigo's resignation.  Like his predecessor, Isoun is a man 
of integrity and well respected in the Niger Delta. 
 
 
¶35. (U) The Isouns' home in Odi, Bayelsa was destroyed by a 
joint military and police task force in November 1999.  After 
Odi and before he became Minister, Isoun led a delegation of 
residents of the town to see Obasanjo, during which Isoun 
showed Obasanjo photographs of the devastation.  The 
President reacted badly then, but Isoun says he refuses to 
shy away from giving sound advice on sensitive issues.  Isoun 
worked hard on Obasanjo's state visit to Bayelsa in March. 
 
 
¶36. (U) Isoun is an optimist by nature and takes great pains 
not to criticize anyone directly.  His positive outlook makes 
him particularly effective at motivating others.  He is 
particularly proud of the newly launched National Strategy on 
Information Technology.  Isoun just returned from Boston and 
Seattle, where he gave speeches at the Harvard Business 
School and at Microsoft. 
 
 
¶37. (U) Isoun holds a Ph.D. in Veterinary Pathology from 
Michigan State University.  He returned to Nigeria and was 
one of the founders of the Rivers State University of Science 
and Technology in Port Harcourt.  Isoun became the 
University's first Vice Chancellor. 
 
 
¶38. (U) Isoun and his wife, Marian, run a non-governmental 
organization called the Niger Delta Wetlands Center in Port 
Harcourt.  The NDWC has a newly completed second office in 
Yenagoa.  The NDWC focuses on environmental, human rights, 
and conflict resolution issues and both Professor Isoun and 
his wife are longstanding and reliable contacts on Delta 
issues.  Marian, an American citizen, is one of our wardens 
in Port Harcourt. Isoun was born on September 2, 1938. 
 
 
Minister of Solid Minerals Odion Ugbesia 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶39. (U) Ugbesia is another returning minister and the only 
Edo State representative in the Cabinet.  In Obasanjo's first 
term he was the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, and 
functioned more under the shadow of the former Works and 
Housing Minister, Tony Anenih.  Ugbesia is often quiet and 
goes unnoticed. 
 
 
¶40. (U) He was more visible during the National Identity Card 
registration exercise and ever since the exercise ended, 
Ugbesia had reclined into his shell of silence. 
 
 
Minister of Transportation: Abiye Sekibo 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶41. (U) A medical doctor and prominent PDP politician from 
Rivers State, Dr. Sekibo, was likely appointed to his post 
due to his support in helping reelect Rivers State's Governor 
Peter Odili. 
 
 
¶42. (U) Sekibo was the Secretary to Governor Peter Odili of 
Rivers State, and has been blamed in some circles for the 
murder of ANPP National Vice Chairman Marshall Harry in 
March; his clinic was firebombed within a week of the murder. 
 
 
Minister of Water Resources: Muktar Shagari 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶43. (C) Mukhtari Shagari, an Obasanjo loyalist and son of 
former Head of State Shehu Shagari, was reappointed as 
Minister of Water Resources.  Shagari likely retained his 
position at the Ministry of Water Resources because he was 
able to secure international assistance and domestic 
investment to "improve" Nigeria's water resource during his 
two years as Minister.  Shagari, who served as Minister of 
Water Resources since June 2001, was one of President 
Obasanjo's handpicked choices to return to the Ministry. 
 
 
¶44. (U) Shagari attended Ahmadu Bello University (ABU) in 
Zaria.  Born in 1959, Mukhtari Shagari is from Sokoto State. 
 
 
Minister of Works: Adeseye Ogunlewe 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
¶45. (U) Former Senator Adeseye Ogunlewe was elected in 1999 
to the National Assembly under the Alliance of Democracy 
(AD)ticket.  He later changed his allegiance to the PDP. 
During the April elections, he lost his seat in the Senate to 
the former Speaker of the Lagos State House of Assembly, 
Olorunimbe Mamora. 
 
 
Economic Advisers: 
 
 
Charles C. Soludo, Chief Economic Adviser to the President 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
 
¶46. (U) Charles C. Soludo, described by United States 
officials as intelligent, worldly and energetic, was likely 
appointed to his position by President Obasanjo because of 
his international connections to leading economists and for 
his pro debt relief stance. 
 
 
¶47. (U) Before assuming his post, Soludo served as the 
Executive Director of the African Institute for Applied 
Economics (AIAE) Enugu, Nigeria.  He was also a Professor of 
Economics at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka.  Dr. Soludo 
has consulted on debt relief and poverty reduction for the 
Bretton Woods Institutions, UN agencies, and USAID. 
 
 
¶48. (U) Educated at Harvard University and Cambridge in the 
United Kingdom, Soludo has co-edited numerous articles and 
several books on African economic issues, including "African 
Voices on Structural Adjustment" and "Sustainable Debt 
Strategy in Nigeria".  Soludo is also a close friend of the 
incoming Minister of Finance and Economy Dr. Ngozi 
Okonjo-Iweala. 
 
 
Senior Special Assistant, Head of Budget Monitoring and Price 
Intelligence Unit: Dr. Oby Ezekwesili 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶49. (U) Oby Ezekwesili is an intelligent interlocutor who is 
not afraid to speak-up or offer opinions.  According to 
Embassy sources, President Obasanjo is promoting Ezekwesili 
as part of a new generation of economic leaders in Nigeria. 
Ezekwesili has been an advisor for more than two years, 
lasting longer than thought possible by some insiders who 
believed her position to be based only on the President's 
short-term goal of presenting to the international community 
that Nigeria's economic policy will improve under new and 
respected advisers. 
 
 
Special Advisor/Director General Budget: Mr. Bode Augusto 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶50. (U) Before assuming his post, Augusto was Managing 
Director of Augusto and Company Limited, a credit rating and 
business information company.  He qualified as a chartered 
accountant in 1981, obtaining the third prize in the overall 
order of merit.  He worked with Price Waterhouse in Lagos and 
London as an auditor, tax consultant and management 
consultant. 
 
 
¶51. (U) Augusto also worked in Citibank Nigeria first as an 
operations officer and later as a credit officer.  He left 
Price Waterhouse as the partner in charge of the financial 
services consulting group to found Augusto & Co. Limited in 
¶1992.  He is also on the faculty of the Lagos Business 
School.  He has expert knowledge of the Nigerian 
macro-economic environment and the Nigerian financial 
services industry.  Mr. Augusto is a member of the board of 
FATE Foundation, an entrepreneurship-training organization in 
Lagos. 
Special Advisor on Program and Policy Monitoring: Professor 
Julius Ihonvbere 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
¶52. (U) Human Rights activist, Professor of Political 
Science, Julius Ihonvbere is the current vice-chairman of the 
United Democratic Front of Nigeria, UDFN, a coalition of 
pro-democracy, nationality and human rights groups in North 
America and Europe.  He was founding president of the 
Organization of Nigerians in the Americas, ONA and 
coordinator of the Global Network of Nigeria of Nigerian 
Organizations, GNNO. 
 
 
¶53. (U) He is also currently project director, 
Constitutionalism Project, International League for Human 
Rights in New York; visiting professor of political science, 
University of Lagos and President, African Center for 
Constitutional Development in Lagos, and Program Officer. 
 
 
¶54. (U) Ihonvbere was educated at the University of Ife (now 
Obafemi Awolowo University), Ile-Ife, Osun State; Carleton 
University in Ottawa, Canada, and University of Toronto, 
Canada.  He was a lecturer at the University of Ife, before 
he was forced into exile for opposing Nigeria,s military 
regime in 1990.  He later returned to the University of 
Toronto as visiting professor.  Ihonvbere was a vice-chairman 
and chairman of the Academic Staff Union of Universities, 
ASUU, while he was a lecturer at the University of 
Port-Harcourt. 
 
 
¶55. (U) Professor Ihonvbere, born June 25, 1956 in Edo State, 
is married and has children. 
 
 
Special Advisor on AGOA: Mrs. Gladys Modupe Sasore 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
 
¶56. (C) An astute and engaging politician, Gladys Modupe 
Sasore was likely appointed to her post because of her 
loyalty to the President Obasanjo and her growing political 
clout within the ruling People's Democratic Party (PDP). 
Sasore joined Obasanjo's ruling PDP party in the run-up to 
the 1999 presidential election, campaigning and garnering 
support for the President in her native Lagos.  After 
Obasanjo's election in 1999, Sasore was appointed Special 
Assistant on Presidential Matters.  She held the position 
until December 2002 when she reentered politics to run as PDP 
candidate for Lagos' West Senatorial seat.  The 54-year-old 
Sasore, however, lost in this year's senatorial election. 
 
 
¶57. (U) Sasore entered politics in 1979 under the defunct 
Unity Party of Nigeria (UPN), participating prominently at 
the local council level.  During the 1980 and 1990s, Sasore 
served as a lawyer, first for Unilever Nigeria and later for 
West African Portland Cement Company (WAPCO).  However, she 
remained active in politics, and with the death of former 
President Abacha in 1998, she backed Obasanjo's presidential 
bid. 
LIBERI