This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

090933Z Nov 03UNCLAS LAGOS 002322 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB PGOV KDEM ECON NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIAN NATIONAL LABOUR CONGRESS OPPOSES 
OBASANJO'S LABOR REFORM BILL 
 
 
¶1. (U) The latest stage in the recurring disputes between the 
President and the National Labour Congress (NLC) was 
President Olusegun Obasanjo's submission of a bill to the 
National Assembly to revise laws governing trade unions.  The 
bill seeks to amend Nigeria's Trade Unions Act by recognizing 
multiple trade unions centers and calling for voluntary union 
membership.  In addition, the bill removes a mandatory 10 per 
cent dues check-off for trade union centers, giving unions 
the option of financially supporting affiliate organizations 
like the NLC. 
 
 
¶2. (U) NLC Deputy President Joseph Akinlaja told ConGen's 
Political/Labor Specialist that the NLC met on Friday, 
October 31, and issued a communique which criticized the 
Presidency for its attempt to weaken the organization. 
Likewise, during a meeting with Anthony Jones, Country 
Director for the AFL-CIO Solidarity Center, NLC President 
Adams Oshiomhole characterized GON efforts to dismantle the 
current labor structure as a "civilian dictatorship" that has 
led unions "to fight for their lives in a way they never had 
under Abacha."  Oshiomhole added that the NLC is considering 
several strategies to defeat the proposed legislation, 
including a plan to mobilize opposition to the bill through a 
state-by-state campaign to ensure that its rank and file 
understands the impact of the GON-proposed revisions. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) The NLC is also working to form alliances within the 
National Assembly and is aggressively seeking support from 
several key GON leaders, including representatives of the 
Senate and House Committees on Labor and the Senate 
President.  Akinlaja told PolSpec that the two legislative 
houses are quite supportive of labor's stance on a wide range 
of issues and key leaders have committed themselves to 
defeating the bill.  However, the mood at Labor House (NLC 
headquarters) is not as optimistic, according to Anthony 
Jones, who is observing NLC meetings to develop a national 
strategy.  Jones told LabOff that following the failed 
Stakeholders Forum that saw several government leaders 
distance themselves from the NLC, the NLC leadership is 
beginning to question whether its allies within government 
will serve as visible advocates for labor despite pressure 
from the Presidency. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Although the NLC remains optimistic, it has begun 
considering its legal options should the bill pass.  While 
the NLC is not considering strike as an option to contest 
Obasanjo's recent efforts to reform labor laws, its leaders 
argue that it has primarily used the right to strike as a 
tool to force the GON to honor commitments it has already 
made.  They believe that a GON commitment to bargain in good 
faith and constructively involve unions in promoting 
worker-friendly policies would empower labor in other ways 
and promote a more industrious process to resolve conflicts. 
 
 
¶5. Comment.  Union leaders are also seeking labor reform and 
have become increasingly philosophical as they reassess their 
role in improving the quality of life for Nigerian workers. 
Their grievances are more procedural and focus on 
establishing a sustainable process for implementing and 
enforcing collective bargaining agreements.  While unions are 
pleased with the collective bargaining process in the private 
sector, the GON has struggled to maintain productive 
relationships with key labor leaders.  The NLC leadership is 
concerned that labor's power lies solely in its right to 
strike, which has created an environment characterized by 
confrontation. 
HINSON-JONES