This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001904 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND WHA/USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ASEC PHUM KDEM PINR PINS GT
SUBJECT: FRG PROTESTS CONTINUE 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1900 
 
¶1. (U) An estimated 3,000 to 5,000 pro-Rios Montt protesters 
remained overnight at several locations in the capital and 
continue to surround the Constitutional Court, the Supreme 
Court, and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal building.  A tense 
calm has returned to Guatemala City for the moment, with very 
light traffic flowing and no tires burning as of 8:30 a.m. 
local time.  Radio reports indicate that busses with FRG 
supporters have left Coban, Totonicapan and the south coast 
bringing more protesters into Guatemala City.  Protests are 
expected to resume later this morning. 
 
¶2. (U) Around 6:00 PM, July 24, security forces successfully 
evacuated some 900 people from a commercial center owned by 
opposition financier Dionisio Gutierrez.  Protesters later 
withdrew from the entrance of La Canada, allowing numerous 
officials, politicians, and diplomats to reach their 
residences.  All U.S. mission personnel were able to spend 
the night in their own homes. The Embassy opened on July 25 
with essential personnel only. 
 
¶3. (U) Rios Montt gave a press conference at 8:00 PM on July 
24 in which he implausibly denied that the disturbances were 
organized by "the Executive Committee of the FRG," while 
acknowledging that the protesters were his supporters.  He 
dodged questions about the activities of FRG Congressmen, 
such as Juan Santa Cruz, who were shown on television 
coordinating activities of the protesters. When asked why the 
FRG protesters had targeted the offices of Dionisio 
Gutierrez, he said "I didn't send them to (Gutierrez's 
office), I told them to go to the Supreme Court."  Caught in 
the apparent contradiction with his earlier statement that he 
had not been involved in the organization of the protests, 
his handlers called an immediate end to the press conference 
and removed the 76 year old former general from the room. 
 
¶4. (U) President Portillo gave a seven minute address to the 
nation on the afternoon of July 24, saying that the police 
and army would maintain order and protect private property. 
There was a noticeable absence of police, however, throughout 
the day at most protest locations. 
 
¶5. (SBU) On the evening of July 24, the Ambassador met with 
representatives of civil society, the private sector and 
political parties (at their request).  Participants, whose 
spirits were clearly inflamed by the violent events of the 
day, accused the GOG of being complicit along with the FRG in 
the violence, noting that despite public assurances from 
President Portillo and Minister of Government Reyes Calderon, 
police did nothing to stop the violence.  Many saw the 
violent protests as aimed at intimidating the opposition by 
showing them that the FRG knows where they live and work, and 
the police will do nothing to protect them.  Several civil 
society leaders noted that the FRG's willingness to use 
violence makes it important that the election observation 
effort be expanded.  Others said it was time for the OAS to 
call a special Permanent Council session and invoke the 
Democratic Charter.  The Ambassador told the opposition, 
civil society and private sector leaders that our efforts in 
the immediate term would be aimed at securing the restoration 
of public order, and that following the return of normalcy it 
would be important to take stock of where the electoral 
process stands. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Ambassador is seeking meetings on July 25 with 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez, Minister of Government Calderon, 
and National Pol