This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101118Z Nov 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 COLOMBO 001940 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (CAMP, DEAN, WALLER); SA/PD (REINCKENS, SCENSNY, 
STRYKER; SSA/PAS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  POLITICAL CRISIS IN SRI LANKA 
 
 
¶1. Summary.  Since the eruption of Sri Lanka's latest 
political crisis, the English and vernacular media have 
been in a frenzy.   Over the weekend, television stations 
and newspapers in Sri Lanka avidly chronicled the political 
tug-of-war between President Chandrika Bandaranaike 
Kumaratunga and Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe. 
Meanwhile, security concerns, the LTTE's reaction, and the 
economy also elicited interest. Reaction from the 
international community enjoyed prominent coverage. 
Editorial comment in English and vernacular newspapers was 
heavy and focused on cohabitation issues.  Government-owned 
newspapers promoted the President's stance, and the 
"...need to explore ways of cohabiting harmoniously in the 
name of the common good."   Independent commentary was 
varied:  some editors urged an attempt at cohabitation, 
others were openly skeptical. "We will not make ourselves 
appear to be damned fools by once again appealing for co- 
operation between the two personalities," said one daily. 
End summary. 
 
----- 
Headlines 
----- 
 
¶2.  Over the weekend, television stations and newspapers in 
Sri Lanka avidly chronicled the political tug-of-war 
between President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga and 
Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe.  The government-owned 
English DAILY NEWS soothed (11/7), "Govt. will continue 
talks with the LTTE, no return to war - President." 
Meanwhile, independent English DAILY MIRROR reminded 
readers (11/8), "PM arrives to Hero's welcome," reinforced 
by independent Maharaja Television's English and vernacular 
newscasts (11/7-8) of the tens of thousands of people 
lining the Prime Minister's motorcade route from the 
airport.   Unsurprisingly, independent Tamil daily, 
VIRAKESARI's headline was also supportive of Wickremesinghe 
(11/8), "Whatever obstacles may come, peace efforts will be 
carried forward - Prime Minister." 
 
¶3.  The next obstacle was not far behind.  Government-owned 
Sri Lanka Rupavahini Television carried the President's 
address to the nation (11/7), in which she proposed a 
national government.  Government-owned Sinhala daily, 
DINAMINA, headlined (11/8), "President invited patriotic 
forces to build the nation, ready to talk with PM and UNP 
leaders."  The Prime Minister's response was swift, as 
independent Tamil weekly THINAKKURAL reported (11/9), "UNF 
rejects President's invitation for a national government." 
Independent English weekly, SUNDAY ISLAND added (11/9), 
"Ranil not ready to play second fiddle, wants CBK to take 
charge of peace process alone."  Finally, President 
Kumaratunga gave an interview to the BBC (11/9) in which 
she declared the cease fire agreement unconstitutional 
because she had not signed it.  Independent Tamil daily, 
VIRAKESARI headlined (11/10), "President attempts to 
disrupt peace process." 
 
¶4. Meanwhile, security concerns and the LTTE's reaction 
were also of interest.  Government-owned English SUNDAY 
OBSERVER headlined (11/9), "Armed forces on the alert," 
and independent Tamil weekly, THINAKKURAL (11/9) warned, 
"Security arrangements on the increase."  LTTE reaction was 
muted, primarily quoting LTTE eastern military commander 
Karuna.  Pro-LTTE website TAMILNET headlined late last week 
(11/7), "We are strong, we will be patient - Col. Karuna." 
Government-owned Tamil daily THINAKARAN (11/8) quoted 
Karuna, "We are observing the political situation in the 
south with concern,"  while independent English daily, 
ISLAND expanded his sentiments more critically (11/8), "CBK 
smashed up the pot while the milk was churning into 
butter."  Independent English DAILY MIRROR paraphrased 
(11/8), "LTTE:  we will watch and wait." 
 
¶5. Reactions from the  international community were also 
prominently covered.   Independent English DAILY MIRROR 
reported (11/8), " Vajpayee expressed concern to CBK," but 
independent English weekly, SUNDAY LEADER weighed in 
strongly (11/9), "India, US put brakes on CBK." Independent 
Sinhala weekly, SUNDAY LANKADEEPA noted (11/9), "USG 
confident in PM government."  Independent English weekly, 
SUNDAY ISLAND reported on US and Sri Lankan military 
training exercises (11/9), "Army confident US troops won't 
leave,"  but independent Tamil daily, THINAKKURAL fretted 
(11/8), "British government upset about the political 
crisis in Sri Lanka," and (11/10) "International community 
urges President to strengthen cohabitation agreement." 
 
¶6. The media frenzy did not neglect the economic impact of 
the crisis.  Government-owned English DAILY NEWS 
optimistically wrote (11/8), "Bourse soars to new heights," 
and continued the theme in government-owned English weekly, 
SUNDAY OBSERVER (11/9), "Stocks recover:  highest gain in 
single day."  Although independent English DAILY NEWS also 
cheered (11/8),  "Stock market booms after Ranil lands," 
the next morning its headline was more dire (11/9), "Crisis 
threatens economic recovery."  Independent English weekly, 
SUNDAY LEADER revisited a particular worry in Sri Lanka 
(11/9), "FTA with US in jeopardy." 
 
----- 
Editorials 
----- 
¶7. Editorial comment in English and vernacular newspapers 
was heavy and focused on cohabitation issues.  Government- 
owned newspapers promoted the President's stance. 
Independent commentary was varied:  some editors urged an 
attempt at cohabitation, others were openly skeptical. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Turn current problems into 
opportunities," government-owned English DAILY NEWS (11/8) 
predictably commented  that the President and Prime 
Minister, "...Need to explore ways of cohabiting 
harmoniously in the name of the common good." 
 
Block quotes: 
It is obvious that the issues at the heart of the present 
political crisis pertain principally to power, prestige and 
control. The parties to the conflict need to pause awhile 
to ascertain whether they intend placing power over the 
well-being of the country. If not, the President, the Prime 
Minister and their respective parties need to explore ways 
of cohabiting harmoniously in the name of the common good. 
We strongly urge that these problems are turned into 
opportunities. 
End block quotes. 
 
----- Under the headline, "President's invitation to form a 
national government, government-owned Tamil weekly, 
THINAKARAN VAARA MANJARI (11/09) urged cohabitation and 
commented, " the political situation in the country...is an 
internal problem." 
 
Block quote. 
Many foreign countries are watching the political situation 
in the country and they are of the opinion that it is an 
internal problem.  This is the truth.  The two leaders who 
have been chosen by the people should solve their dispute 
through talks.  The President and the Prime Minister should 
unitedly undertake future peace activities to establish 
peace in the country. 
End block quote. 
 
 ----- Under the headline, "Wanted: A peace of another 
kind," independent English daily, ISLAND (11/8) disparaged 
cohabitation between the President and Prime Minister, "We 
will not make ourselves appear to be damned fools by once 
again appealing for co-operation between the two 
personalities." 
Block quotes: 
This encounter has already cost the nation dearly. The 
stock market which took years to recover has crashed in 
just two days. Travel warnings have been issued by many 
nations and businessmen are in a dizzy spin trying to 
fathom the damage. The stupid declaration of an emergency 
has been cancelled. Why it was done defies a logical 
answer. 
We will not make ourselves appear to be damned fools by 
once again appealing for co-operation between the two 
personalities. If they can't, it would be far better to go 
to the polls. Perhaps the same results may ensue but it 
would be better to have tried and failed than to watch the 
nation falling apart. 
End block quotes. 
----- Under the headline, "Wanted: A miracle," independent 
English daily, ISLAND (11/10) commented that, "...Only a 
miracle can bring about a Government of Reconstruction and 
Rehabilitation." 
Block quotes: 
If President Kumaratunga wants to be in charge of defence 
matters, the prime minister is of the view that she should 
also be in charge of the `Peace Process'. The argument that 
one person should be in charge of both defence and the 
peace process, indeed stands to reason. But there is a 
third factor involved: the LTTE, which will certainly not 
want the involvement of the president. 
President Kumaratunga cannot be faulted for her call for a 
Government of National Reconstruction and Rehabilitation, 
however far fetched it may be at the moment. But, there 
will be problems in her own camp as well , with the JVP 
objecting to compliance with the Oslo and Tokyo 
Declarations. Ranil Wickremasinghe will have to be a 
Vessantara to make the sacrifice of three key ministerial 
portfolios and three state media institutions to his arch 
rival and still go into political co- habitation. 
We do not believe in miracles. Right now, however only a 
miracle can bring about a Government of Reconstruction and 
Rehabilitation. 
End block quotes. 
----- Under the headline, "What is national interest?" 
independent Tamil weekly, VIRAKESARI (10/9) commented, "It 
is the Tamils who will be affected by the political 
struggle for power by the two major parties in the 
country." 
Block quote. 
The President's conscience will tell her how the security 
and the economic condition of the country were when she was 
in charge.  It is due to the ethnic problem Sri Lanka 
earned a bad name among the world countries.  The President 
is attempting to place impediments against peace.  The 
President's request for the removal of the Head of the SLMM 
and creating a political crisis soon after the LTTE placed 
its proposals for interim administration are glaring 
examples of her attempt to block peace.  If there is a true 
interest in national affairs, prominence should be given to 
the solving of the ethnic issue.  It is the Tamils who will 
be affected by the political struggle for power by the two 
major parties in the country. 
End block quote. 
----- Under the headline, "National Govt. A romantic 
notion?"  independent English weekly, SUNDAY TIMES (11/9) 
pessimistically opined, " The cry of millions of peoples 
for the country's parallel governments to work together for 
the common good is just only music to the deaf." 
 
Block quotes: 
So, the country plunges into another period of uncertainty 
as the politicians play out their games of one-upmanship 
and intrigue. The days ahead will see back-stabbing and 
bribery at the highest levels of Government indulged in by 
the highest in the land. 
An invitation to treat as lawyers would say, was made last 
Friday by President Kumaratunga in the form of a National 
Reconciliation Government, a romantic notion nevertheless 
even among those middle of the road leaders in both the PA 
and the UNF. 
The hard-liners on both sides of the political divide just 
want it that way, and neither the leader of the PA nor the 
UNF has the courage to provide the leadership that this 
country wants from them. The cry of millions of peoples for 
the country's parallel governments to work together for the 
common good is just only music to the deaf. 
End block quotes. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Mrs. Debacle Strikes Again," 
independent English weekly, SUNDAY LEADER (11/9) scathingly 
dressed down the President, "It is time to pack this 
malicious mama off: we are done with her." 
Block quotes: 
Kumaratunga is a woman - nay, a greedy, power-hungry woman 
- full up to her Adam's apple in envy and spite, growing 
sick of the prosperity knocking on Sri Lanka's door, a 
prosperity that flees at the very sight of her. And on the 
eve of the budget, with her rival safely in Washington, the 
coward Chandrika struck in true Bandaranaike style, from 
behind the back. Within hours, the stock market crashed: 
that is how much confidence the nation has in her. Within 
hours, she sent her storm troopers in to seize key media 
installations. Now its back to Lake House, Rupavahini and 
ITN trumpeting her propaganda. Enjoy, fellow citizens, the 
curse of Sri Lanka is back! 
That is why it is essential that we set politics aside and 
truly look to the national interest and, above all, act 
responsibly, unlike the spoilt child Kumaratunga is, ever 
ready to pee on the carpet to gain attention. 
Kumaratunga has given the LTTE the best justification to 
continue rearming until a final settlement is 
constitutionally approved. 
With the President running amok it is some consolation that 
the Prime Minister kept his head and remained calm under 
pressure. Wickremesinghe's systematic approach to 
Kumaratunga's provocation was masterly. Displaying his 
overwhelming parliamentary majority, he laid bare 
Kumaratunga's claim to authority. Now it is up to him to 
muster parliament to defy the fraudster we call 
President... If Kumaratunga stands in [his] way through 
self interest, well, she must be moved aside. 
 It is time to pack this malicious mama off: we are done 
with her. Take a bow, Mrs. Debacle. 
End block quotes. 
----- Under the headline, "Current confusion and solution," 
independent Sinhala daily, LAKBIMA (11/10) commented, 
"...it is the duty and responsibility of all leaders to put 
country before their personal political agendas and make a 
united and honest effort to solve the problem at hand..." 
Block quotes. 
The current political crisis has caused a stressful and 
unstable situation in political, economic and 
administrative sectors of the country. This turmoil has 
unfortunately occurred at a time when the economy was 
taking a progressive turn with vast improvements in the 
Stock Market. But this unexpected crisis has pulled down 
everything into an abyss of uncertainty and instability. It 
is 
imperative to resolve this political crisis to avoid the 
country and the people from being drawn into a very 
unfortunate situation. 
 
At this critical juncture it is the duty and responsibility 
of all leaders to put country before their personal 
political agendas and make a united and honest effort to 
solve the problem at hand in a manner favourable to the 
country and the people. 
End block quotes.  LUNSTEAD