This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 003155 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/12/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: RETURN OF THE HOCA 
 
(U) Classified by Polcouns John Kunstadter.  Reason: 1.5 
(b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: At Saadet Party's May 11 national convention, 
long-time leader of Turkey's Islamist movement Necmettin 
Erbakan returned to active politics as party chairman. 
Unlike recent conventions of right-of-center DYP and ANAP, 
Saadet's congress was far more lively and colorful.  The mood 
of the crowd and tone of official speeches were decidedly 
anti-AK Party, more specifically anti-P.M. Erdogan. End 
summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Poloff attended Islamist Saadet Party's May 11 
national congress, where long-time leader of Turkey's 
Islamist movement Necmettin Erbakan (known as 'Hoca' or 
teacher) officially returned to active political life after 
his five-year political ban was lifted in February.  The 
77-year old Erbakan was the only candidate for Saadet leader 
and received unanimous support from the party's 1153 
delegates.  Former Saadet leader Recai Kutan retained a high 
position in the party as a member of the party's General 
Administrative Council. 
 
 
------------------------- 
'Our army, Our Commander' 
------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) In contrast to right-of-center DYP and ANAP 
conventions attended by poloff, the Saadet congress was 
orderly and spirited.  Devotees packed the undersized arena 
more than an hour before the convention began, while several 
thousand others mingled outside chanting Islam-tinged slogans 
like 'mucahit Erbakan' (Islamic warrior Erbakan).  Unlike the 
DYP and ANAP congresses, there were significant numbers 
families with young children in attendance.  A large section 
of the arena was reserved for headscarved women activists, 
who were clearly the loudest group on hand.  The slogans and 
chants continued after Erbakan arrived and was escorted to a 
red plush couch on stage: "here's our army, here's our 
commander"; "the legend has returned"; "welcome, my sultan"; 
and "Mehmet the Conqueror was your age when he conquered 
Istanbul." 
 
 
---------------------- 
Light Bulb Burned Out? 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) The mood of the crowd was decidedly anti-AK Party, 
more specifically anti-P.M. Erdogan.  Almost all of the 
numerous banners raised by the crowd attacked AK in some way: 
"My hoca has returned; the light bulb is burned out" (a 
phrase that rhymes in Turkish; AK's symbol is a light bulb); 
"My hoca, rescue us from these children"; and "Those who 
skipped class should have stayed in school."  In addition, a 
Saadet official read aloud goodwill messages from political 
figures.  The crowd booed Erdogan's welcome statement but 
cheered loudly messages from Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc 
(an Erdogan rival in AK); opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal; 
and far-left nationalist Worker's Party leader Dogu Perincek. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Speeches by Erbakan and other senior party officials 
picked up on the theme, heavily criticizing AK for 
ineffective governance and for straying from the Islamist 
flock.  Erbakan, in particular, accused AK members of 
deserting the path they had chosen for 30 years.  He 
pointedly left out any mention of Fazilet Party in his 
remarks on the history of the Islamist movement in Turkey 
(note: Erdogan, Arinc, and others broke away from Fazilet 
after the party was closed in 2001 and formed AK. End note). 
 
 
¶6. (C) Comment: There is a core of about 40 AK M.P.s who, as 
former provincial lieutenants in Erbakan's Milli Gorus 
(National View) movement, remain devoted to him and intent on 
disrupting Erdogan's control of the parliamentary group and 
legislative agenda.  Concerned that Erbakan will woo many or 
all of them away from AK, Erdogan has indicated to his 
advisors he has limited room for bold political maneuver, 
including foreign policy steps seen by Milli Gorus adherents 
as too openly in line with U.S. interests, in the months 
leading up to AK's first party congress.  End comment. 
PEARSON