This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 001586 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS 
LONDON FOR POL - GURNEY 
NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/20/2013 
TAGS: PTER PGOV NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  MAOISTS SEE "IMPERIALIST DESIGN" IN 
NEGOTIATION PROCESS 
 
REF: A. KATHMANDU 1577 
 
     ¶B. KATHMANDU 1565 
 
Classified By: AMB. MICHAEL E. MALINOWSKI.  REASON:  1.5 (B,D). 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY 
--------- 
 
¶1.  (C) The Government of Nepal's (GON) lead negotiator, Dr. 
Prakash Chandra Lohani, told the Ambassador that Maoist 
negotiators were unwilling to discuss any of the GON's 
political reform proposals during the third round of talks 
held August 17-18.  Instead, Maoist negotiator Dr. Baburam 
Bhattarai denounced GON efforts to engage in 
confidence-building measures as an "imperialist design" 
instigated by foreign powers.  Despite the "tremendous gap" 
between GON and Maoist positions, both sides agreed to touch 
base with one another after seven days.  Lohani said the GON 
was "taken aback" by the Maoists' categorical refusal to 
discuss anything short of the GON's complete capitulation on 
the issue of the constituent assembly.  Whether the Maoists 
decide to stay in the talks will depend, Lohani said, on 
pressure from civil society for negotiations to continue. 
End summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
MAOISTS' "ONE-POINT PERSPECTIVE" 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  On August 21 Finance Minister and lead Government of 
Nepal (GON) negotiator, Dr. Prakash Chandra Lohani, called 
the Ambassador to offer a quick readout of the August 17-18 
negotiating sessions with the Maoists (Reftels).  (The 
Ambassador will have a longer meeting with time for more 
thorough discussions with Lohani's fellow negotiator, 
Information Minister Kamal Thapa, on August 25.)  Lohani 
reported that the Maoists refused to discuss any of the GON's 
political reform proposals during either of the two sessions, 
reiterating repeatedly that they were prepared to talk only 
about the constituent assembly. "They expected us to 
surrender completely" on that point, Lohani said, adding that 
he told them, "The Government did not come here to 
surrender."  Rather than tackling controversial issues like 
the constituent assembly first, the normal negotiating 
process is for the two sides to examine the GON's proposed 
agenda for reform and identify areas of common concern where 
they could work together, he told his Maoist interlocutors. 
 
 
¶3.  (C)  Chief Maoist negotiator Dr. Baburam Bhattarai 
retorted that the "normal negotiating process" Lohani 
described is an "imperialist design" forwarded by foreign 
forces.  He demanded that the two sides discuss "political 
issues" before any other topic.  Lohani replied that the 
GON's proposals for constitutional reform fall under the 
category of "political issues," and again invited the Maoist 
negotiators to identify topics within GON parameters (that do 
not compromise the constitutional monarchy, multi-party 
democracy, sovereignty of the people and national unity) that 
could be addressed through constitutional amendment. 
Bhattarai again refused to engage in any discussion.  The 
Maoists have a "one-point perspective," Bhattarai stated, 
with a single focus on the need for a constituent assembly 
"to decide the big concept of the future structure of our 
state."  Unless the GON submits to that viewpoint, there is 
no further scope for discussion, he concluded.  When Lohani 
then asked Bhattarai to offer more details on how the Maoists 
envision the constituent assembly, Bhattarai refused to 
discuss that either.  The Maoists will discuss the details of 
the assembly only after the GON agrees to accept it, 
Bhattarai said. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Lohani said he concluded the session by 
acknowledging the "tremendous gap" between the positions of 
the two sides.  Both sides agreed to consult with their 
respective leadership and make contact again in a week. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
MAOIST POSITION:  FACADE OR REAL DEAL? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Lohani told the Ambassador that the GON was "taken 
aback" by the Maoists' categorical rejection of its 
proposals.  He said he cannot determine whether their 
reaction is a facade or represents their actual "negotiating" 
position.  The insurgents may be bluffing, he said, or they 
may have overestimated their own strength and expect to be 
able to intimidate the GON into conceding this crucial point. 
 Whether or not the Maoists come back to the negotiating 
table will depend to a large degree, he said, on pressure 
from civil society.  He expressed disappointment over the 
lack of support from mainstream political parties (Ref A). 
He believes that the political leadership actually agrees 
with many of the GON's proposals but is unwilling to support 
the GON publicly. 
 
--------- 
COMMENT 
--------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Lohani's description of the Maoists' behavior during 
this most recent "negotiation" borders on the farcical.  The 
Maoist understanding of negotiations--that the other side 
capitulate immediately and unquestioningly and work out the 
details of what it agreed to later--seems to offer little 
prospect for a political settlement to this costly, bloody 
conflict.  We plan to increase our efforts to encourage civil 
society--which has remained largely silent--and the leaders 
of the mainstream political parties to adopt a more helpful 
public posture at this crucial juncture. 
 
 
MALINOWSKI