This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RANGOON 000951 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV BM
SUBJECT: GOB'S CONCERNS OVER AUGUST 7 SECURITY INCIDENT 
 
¶1.  Post has received information from the Department that 
uniformed Secret Service arrested 3 Burmese students at the 
Burmese embassy the morning of August 7 after they tried to 
use a ladder to remove the Burmese flag and replace it with 
their own (a Burmese dissident report on the incident said 
they were attempting to unfurl a banner from a balcony that 
said "EXPEL THE AMBASSADOR NOW").  There is also a vigil 
planned by the students for 8:00 p.m. on August 8.  Post 
understands that SS has beefed up security at the chancery 
and the Ambassador's residence and that the Burmese will 
request a permanent fixed post. 
 
¶2.  The COM was called to the Foreign Ministry late Friday 
afternoon, August 8, to meet with the Director General for 
Political Affairs.  The reason for the summons was to 
express the GOB's concern over the incident detailed below. 
The DG confirmed that the Burmese Embassy was receiving a 
response to their request for extra security but wanted to 
reiterate the GOB's concern, especially as it relates to 
the intrusion into diplomatic premises.  The DG said they 
could "deal with protests" but were worried that "things 
could get out of hand".  The COM assured the DG that the 
U.S. Government took its responsibility for protecting 
diplomatic missions with the utmost seriousness and that 
she would relay the GOB's concern to the Department. 
 
¶3.  As frequently noted in post's reporting on security 
issues, the GOB is very responsive to our requests for 
ongoing security at the Chancery, the American Center, and 
diplomatic residential compounds and they have responded 
positively and quickly to requests for enhanced security 
for special events.  The GOB also provided a bodyguard 
detail for the COM (and offered the same for other Embassy 
senior officers) during the run-up to Iraq and until the 
active fighting was declared over. 
 
¶4.  Action Request:  Given the physical vulnerabilities of 
our aging USG facilities here, we need continued GOB 
cooperation on security issues.  Post urges that GOB 
requests for upgraded security be met with a timely 
and effective response. 
Martinez