This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  VATICAN 003847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/WE LEVIN; NEA/RA; NEA/NGA; DRL/IRF; IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2013 
TAGS: IZ PREL PGOV EAID VT
SUBJECT: HOLY SEE BACKS GOVERNING COUNCIL, RECONSTRUCTION 
PROCESS IN IRAQ 
 
REF: A. A) STATE 235394 
     ¶B. B) AUG 22 LEVIN - MARTIN EMAIL 
 
Classified By: Charge d'affaires, D. Brent Hardt for reasons 1.5 (b) an 
d (d). 
 
-------- 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) In the wake of the UN Headquarters attack, Vatican 
Deputy Foreign Minister Parolin reacted positively to our 
call for support for the Iraqi Governing Council (ref A), and 
said the Holy See would likely be open to talks with its 
representatives.  Parolin expressed interest in securing Holy 
See participation at the upcoming donors' conference in 
Spain.  Through its nuncio in Iraq, the Vatican has 
emphasized the importance of maintaining the international 
commitment to Iraq's reconstruction following the terrorist 
attack.  During his recent return to Rome, the nuncio had 
given the Holy See a generally positive assessment of the 
situation on the ground.  Parolin expressed concern about and 
interest in reports of Iranian meddling in Iraq, and 
indicated he would welcome information from the U.S. on 
Iran's activities.  The Holy See maintains an active 
relationship with Iran, and may be willing to weigh in with 
Iran to discourage further involvement.  See ACTION REQUEST 
para. 6.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Vatican Supportive on Reconstruction Efforts 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Holy See Deputy Foreign Minister Pietro Parolin was 
upbeat in conversations on Iraq with the CDA August 20. 
Though saddened by the previous day's attack on UN 
Headquarters, Parolin was receptive to our approach (per ref 
A) for support for the Iraqi Governing Council (GC) and the 
reconstruction process in general.  He agreed that the 
coalition and international community had to press forward 
with the reconstruction process.  Parolin foresaw no problem 
in receiving GC representatives to begin talks on issues of 
mutual concern, including the possibility of establishing a 
liaison office to the Holy See, building on the 
infrastructure of Iraq's former Vatican diplomatic 
representation. 
 
¶3. (C) Parolin expressed interest in the Vatican's attending 
the October 23-24 donors' conference in Spain.  Though the 
Holy See itself has limited assistance funds, its affiliated 
charitable institutions such as CARITAS -- which are 
coordinated by the Vatican's Council Cor Unum -- have been 
active in Iraq for many years and have a well-developed 
relief and reconstruction infrastructure in the country. 
Moreover, Parolin indicated that the Holy See wanted to 
emphasize its moral support for Iraqi reconstruction.  Per 
ref B, we will inform the Holy See that it should approach 
Spain to coordinate its potential participation in the 
meeting. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Constructive View of Events on the Ground 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) The Vatican's view of events on the ground in Iraq 
since the end of the war remains constructive and 
surprisingly upbeat.  The Apostolic Nuncio to Iraq, 
Archbishop Fernando Filoni, told Vatican Radio August 21 that 
the attack on UN Headquarters should not deter the 
international community in its commitment to return Iraq to 
normalcy.  Though there are people who "do not want 
normality," the majority of Iraqis do, he commented.  The way 
to achieve this normalcy, Filoni said, is to develop 
international relations "between Iraq and other countries." 
Filoni, in fact, had been in Rome recently on leave and was 
said to be in good spirits.  He told Parolin that while the 
security situation was affecting aid distribution, overall 
conditions in the country were improving.  He believed the 
top priorities must now be the hospitals and security. 
Filoni reported to the Holy See about a recent killing of a 
Christian in Northern Iraq, but said that the Nunciature was 
still investigating the motives behind it to determine 
whether it was religiously motivated. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Chaldean Community Selecting Patriarch 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Parolin told us the Vatican had not been getting much 
news recently from the Chaldean Catholic community in Iraq. 
 
 
However, the Chaldean Synod is in the process of choosing a 
new patriarch for the Church.  The recently deceased 
patriarch, Raphael Bidawid, had been close to Saddam's regime 
and quite vocal in opposition to UN sanctions and US policy 
in general; the identity and approach of the new patriarch 
may have an impact on the atmosphere in Iraq and the future 
direction of the Chaldean community.  Parolin did not 
identify any front-runners. 
 
------------------------------ 
Concern About Iranian Meddling 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6. (C) In wrapping up our discussion on Iraq, the Deputy 
ForMin asked us to gauge the extent to which Iran may be 
contributing to insecurity and instability in southern Iraq. 
CDA responded that the USG has publicly stated its concerns 
about Iranian meddling and that we have raised those concerns 
with a number of countries.  He pledged to make further 
inquiries about USG concerns about Iran's role, which Parolin 
said the Holy See would welcome.  We note that the Holy See 
maintains an active bilateral dialogue with Iran, and we 
believe it would likely be willing to weigh in with Iranian 
authorities to discourage continued involvement in Iraq. 
Please advise if there is information on this issue 
appropriate to pass to the Holy See in order to encourage 
their engagement with Iran to discourage further meddling in 
Iraq. 
 
HARDT 
 
 
NNNN 
 

 2003VATICA03847 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL