null
Diana T Fritz  05/24/2007 04:16:05 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Search Results

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
CONFIDENTIAL

SIPDIS
TELEGRAM                                             May 12, 2003


To:       No Action Addressee                                    

Action:   Unknown                                                

From:     AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI (ABU DHABI 2335 - PRIORITY)        

TAGS:     PHUM, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, KCRM, KFRD                     

Captions: None                                                   

Subject:  UAE CAMEL RACING SEASON WRAP-UP: MUCH PROGRESS MADE    
          ALTHOUGH WORK STILL REMAINS TO BE DONE                 

Ref:      None                                                   
_________________________________________________________________
C O N F I D E N T I A L        ABU DHABI 02335

SIPDIS
CXABU:
    ACTION: POL 
    INFO:   RSO AMB DCM P/M ECON 

DISSEMINATION: POL
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: CDA: RAALBRIGHT
DRAFTED: POL: MMMENARD
CLEARED: A/DCM: TEWILLIAMS; POL: STWILLIAMS

VZCZCADI598
PP RUEHC RUEHZM RUEHDE
DE RUEHAD #2335/01 1321333
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 121333Z MAY 03
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9935
INFO RUEHZM/GCC COLLECTIVE
RUEHDE/AMCONSUL DUBAI 3120C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 ABU DHABI 002335 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, INL, DRL, PRM, NEA/RA AND NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/11/08 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB TC
SUBJECT: UAE CAMEL RACING SEASON WRAP-UP: MUCH PROGRESS 
MADE ALTHOUGH WORK STILL REMAINS TO BE DONE 
 
REFS: A) ABU DHABI 2124      E) 02 ABU DHABI 3397 
 
      B) ABU DHABI 1414      F) 02 ABU DHABI 2332 
      C) ABU DHABI 415       G) 02 DUBAI 1155 
      D) 02 ABU DHABI 3807   H) 02 DUBAI 3049 
 
¶1.  (U) Classified by Charge d'Affaires, a.i., Richard A. 
Albright for Reasons 1.5(B) and (D). 
 
¶2.  (C) SUMMARY AND COMMENT: A round of meetings with UAE 
officials confirmed earlier reports (see Refs A and B), 
that the UAEG has not yet succeeded 100 percent in 
implementing and enforcing the child camel jockey ban that 
went into effect on 1 September 2002.  The senior 
leadership, however, continues to push forward.  Efforts to 
end the use of child camel jockeys, and thereby eliminate 
this market for trafficking in boys, have been complicated 
by a number of factors, not the least of which were the 
resistance to change from the older generation of Emiratis 
and a lack of willingness in some instances on the part of 
working-level officials to enforce the rules.  Efforts are 
also hampered by the fact that the draft legislation has 
not yet been ratified, although it has been approved by the 
UAE Cabinet.  (Note: Once ratified, the ban will move from 
regulation to federal law, enforceable by law enforcement 
officials. End note.) 
 
¶3.  (C) SUMMARY AND COMMENT, CONT'D: We are encouraged that 
the Emiratis have given themselves a 2-year deadline for 
full implementation, a timeframe that is reasonable, 
considering resistance to the ban and the time of its 
announcement just about a month prior to the start of the 
racing season.  We also consider this timeframe doable 
because of strong political will, as evidenced by MinState 
Shaykh Hamdan's commitment to ending this deplorable 
practice.  Hamdan has personally lobbied the leaders of 
other Emirates to implement the new regulations and approve 
the draft legislation.  He has expended considerable 
political capital in so doing.  Hamdan has also been very 
receptive to the Embassy's interventions, including our 
report that the UAE Camel Racing Federation was not 
carrying out its duties or his instructions.  END SUMMARY 
AND COMMENT. 
 
¶4.  (U) Over the past several weeks, Poloff met with a 
number of UAEG contacts to get a readout on the 
implementation and enforcement of the new camel jockey 
requirements (minimum 15 years and 45 kilograms) effective 
1 September 2002.  (Note: Camel season runs from September 
- April.  End note.)  Interlocutors included:  Khadim Al 
Darei, Office of Minister of State for Foreign Affairs 
Deputy Director; Abdul Ghaffar Al Hawi, Ministry of Health 
Asst U/S for Curative Medicine; Abdulrahim Al Awadi, 
Ministry of Justice Asst U/S for Planning and International 
Cooperation; Yacub Al-Hosani, MFA Legal Affairs Department 
Deputy Director; and Khalfan Khamees, Managing Director of 
the UAE Camel Racing Federation. 
 
Status of Camel Jockey Legislation 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) On 6 May, Abdulrahim Al Awadi, Ministry of 
Justice Asst U/S for Planning and International 
Cooperation, reported to Poloff that the camel jockey 
legislation had been approved by the UAE Cabinet (a.k.a. 
Council of Ministers) and was currently at the Office of 
the Minister of State for Supreme Council Affairs awaiting 
signatures from the seven emirates' rulers.  (Note: The UAE 
Supreme Council is the federation's executive authority and 
ratifies all federal laws and decrees and plans general 
policy. End note.)  Receipt of all seven signatures 
constitutes ratification of the legislation.  The 
legislation will then be published in the federal gazette 
and have the effect of federal law. 
 
¶6.  (U) As reported Refs F and G, the draft legislation 
provides that camel jockeys must be a minimum of 15 years 
and weigh a minimum of 45 kilograms (approximately 99 
pounds).  The legislation will be implemented by the 
issuance of camel jockey identification cards, which will 
be granted to camel jockeys upon application after passing 
a medical exam by a Medical Committee that determines the 
age of the jockey through x-rays, tests, etc.  (Note: UAEG 
officials state that the Medical Committee will not rely on 
the age set forth in the jockey's passport because of the 
possibility of passport fraud. End note.)  The legislation 
will be enforced by the inspection of camel jockey 
identification cards at camel races.  Penalties for 
violation:  1st offense, fine of 20,000 dirhams (about 5500 
USD); 2nd offense, 1-year ban from participating in camel 
racing; 3rd and subsequent offenses, imprisonment. 
 
Current State of Implementation of Camel Jockey Rules 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) On 4 May, Abdul Ghaffar Al-Hawi, Ministry of 
Health Asst U/S for Curative Medicine, informed Poloff that 
the UAEG intends to accomplish full implementation and 
enforcement of the camel jockey legislation throughout the 
UAE within two racing seasons, noting that 100 percent 
implementation and enforcement was impossible to achieve in 
one season. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) For his part, Al-Hawi noted that in September 
2002, the Ministry of Health issued a circular to all 
Curative Medicine offices nationwide with guidelines for 
camel jockey medical exams, which will establish the age of 
the camel jockey and judge his overall physical fitness. 
(Note: Al-Hawi stated that this same medical exam process 
is used to establish the age of professional soccer players 
in the UAE, who are also required to be of a specified 
minimum age. End note.) 
 
¶9. (SBU) Also, according to information provided by MFA 
Desk Officer Shaykha Nejla Al-Qassimi on 11 May, the 
Ministry of Interior conducted DNA tests on 40 boys (to 
establish familial status with the boys' supposed parents) 
between 9 April - 5 May 2003 in connection with the 
processing of their residency with employment as camel 
jockeys. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Since the UAE Camel Racing Federation organizes 
and officiates at camel races, on 29 April Poloff met with 
Mr. Khalfan Khamees, Director of the UAE Camel Racing 
Federation, to determine what has been implemented thus far 
at the camel races.  Khamees reported that, during this 
past camel racing season, the Federation implemented the 
rules in part by weighing camel jockeys before and after 
the races.  He continued that the Federation would begin 
issuing identification cards with proof of age in May. 
(Note: On 29 April, there was a press report in an Arabic- 
language daily announcing that the Federation would begin 
issuing identification cards in May for the 2003-2004 camel 
racing season.  End note.) 
 
¶11. (SBU) When queried as to the minimum weight requirement 
being used for camel jockeys, Khassim responded that 
Federation officials were requiring a minimum weight of 35 
kilograms (about 75 pounds).  When asked why the Federation 
was using 35 pounds vice the minimum weight requirement of 
45 pounds contained in the draft legislation, Khassim 
explained that there had been a "big uproar" after the 
announcement of the new rules.  Apparently, the Federation 
compromised on the minimum weight requirements as a result. 
(Note:  Khassim noted that, prior to this camel-racing 
season, the Federation had required a minimum camel jockey 
weight of 20 kilograms (about 44 pounds).  End note.)  He 
noted that Federation officials would begin enforcing the 
age requirement this upcoming racing season, which would be 
possible by the issuance of camel jockey identification 
cards beginning in May. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Khassim also reported during the 29 April meeting 
that the camel jockey regulation was not a law and that 
"nobody knows [if the rule will become law]."  He also 
stated that penalties for non-compliance were:  1st 
offense, disqualification from the race; 2nd and subsequent 
offenses, fine.  These statements were subsequently refuted 
during Poloff's meetings with Ministry of Justice Asst U/S 
for Planning and International Coordination Abdulrahim Al 
Awadi on 6 May and with MFA Legal Affairs Deputy Director 
Yacoub Al-Hosani on 10 May. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Federation's failure to implement the camel 
jockey minimum age/weight requirements is confirmed by an 
episode of the ABC (Australia Broadcasting Corporation) 
Foreign Correspondents Program broadcast in Australia on 23 
February.  (Note: Poloff discovered this information on 21 
April during an Internet search for information related to 
camel jockeys in the UAE.  End note.)  For a copy, see 
www.abc.net.au/foreign/stories/s789268.htm (synopsis) and 
www.abc.net.au/foreign/stories/s792822.htm (transcript). 
The program includes footage of a camel race in Abu Dhabi 
Emirate and a camel station (where the camels are trained) 
where boys obviously younger than 15 years are being used 
as camel jockeys for races and training. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Polchief and Poloff have used the ABC 
synopsis/transcript as an engagement tool on the issue of 
child camel jockeys by providing a copy to UAE official and 
NGO contacts.  We gave copies of the synopsis/transcript to 
our interlocutors during our April awareness-raising trip 
to Dubai, including:  two Dubai NGO leaders; a 
journalist/UAE University professor; an American University 
Sharjah professor; Director of Corporate Planning and 
Excellence in Government for Dubai Crown Prince Shaykh 
Mohammed Bin Rashid Al-Maktoum's "Executive Office"; and 
Dubai Public Prosecutor's Office Deputy Director of Case 
Management (see Ref A).  Poloff also gave a copy to 
MinState Shaykh Hamdan's Deputy Office Director Khadim Al- 
Darei and MFA Americas Desk Officer Shaykha Nejla Al- 
Qassimi on 23 April; UAE Camel Racing Federation Khalfan 
Khamees on 29 April; and MFA Legal Affairs Department 
Deputy Director Yacoub Al-Hosani on 10 May.  Post ordered a 
video of the program and will disseminate it to UAEG 
interlocutors for their edification, reaction and comment. 
 
¶15. (C) On 4 May, Polchief briefed Yacoub Al-Hosani, MFA 
Legal Affairs Department Deputy Director, on the content of 
the Poloff-Khamees 29 April meeting, noting the 
discrepancies between information about camel jockey rule 
implementation provided to us by UAEG officials (including 
during the G/TIP official visit in January) and by Khamees 
on April 29.  Polchief reported that the Camel Racing 
Federation had failed to implement the rules effectively 
and had a different view of the process (i.e., not a law 
and different penalties).  Al-Hosani was shocked by this 
information because he stated that he had personally 
briefed Khamees on the rules and the UAEG plan for 
implementation and enforcement.  Al-Hosani undertook to 
investigate the matter and respond promptly. 
 
¶16. (C) On or about 6 May, Al-Hosani contacted PolChief and 
reported the results of his investigation.  He noted that 
he had passed the information we gave him about the Camel 
Racing Federation's failure to implement the camel jockey 
rules and apparent lack of knowledge of the ongoing process 
to MFA Asst U/S for Political Affairs Abdullah Rashid Al- 
Nuaimi and Ambassador Sultan Al-Romathi, Office Director 
for MinState Shaykh Hamdan Bin Zayid.  Al-Hosani stated 
that later that day he and Al-Nuaimi were called into 
Shaykh Hamdan's office, at which time Shaykh Hamdan, 
incensed, telephoned Khamees.  During that conversation, 
Shaykh Hamdan ordered Khamees to effectively implement the 
rules and reprimanded him on his failure to follow-through 
on Federation responsibilities. 
 
¶17. (C) Al-Hosani advised that, as a result of the 
information provided by Polchief, the MFA will soon post a 
"legal advisor" to the UAE Camel Racing Federation to 
ensure correct interpretation and implementation of the 
camel jockey legislation.  Al-Hosani also implied that 
Khassim might be asked to leave his position at the 
Federation as a result of his failure to execute his 
duties. 
 
¶18. (C) In a follow-up meeting between Poloff and Al-Hosani 
on 10 May, Al-Hosani advised that -- as an additional 
result of the Federation fiasco -- the Legal Department is 
considering recommending the creation of a working-level 
group, in addition to the already-existing higher-level 
official policy-making working group.  He explained that 
the working-level group would report either to the MFA or 
the higher-level official working group and have the 
responsibility of following-up on the various taskings 
assigned by the higher-level official working group to 
ensure that those taskings are carried out properly and 
timely. 
 
UAE Camel Racing Federation: Organization and Operations 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶19.  (C) Shaykh Zayid's son, Minister of State for Foreign 
Affairs Shaykh Hamdan Bin Zayed, currently serves as 
Chairman of the UAE Camel Racing Federation and is 
responsible for overseeing the Federation's operations. 
Khamees reported that President Zayed personally funds the 
UAE Camel Racing Federation and camel races (along with all 
purses) in all emirates except Dubai Emirate, which are 
funded by the Dubai ruling family. 
 
¶20.  (SBU) In 1993, President Zayed issued a decree 
establishing the UAE Camel Racing Federation, an 
administrative body to organize and oversee the different 
aspects and activities of camel races.  The Federation 
subsequently issued rules and regulations for the 
organization and conduct of camel races, including minimum 
age and weight requirements for camel jockeys.  After many 
years of prior use of underage camel jockeys, Federation 
officials reportedly discovered the minimum age and weight 
requirements to be contentious among camel owners and, 
according to UAE Camel Racing Federation officials, the 
minimum age and weight requirements were not enforced. 
 
¶21.  (U) All racetracks are fully maintained by the UAE 
Camel Racing Federation.  According to Khamees, there are 
no private racecourses.  All racetracks are administered by 
an organizing committee, which reports directly to the 
Federation Director on the conduct of races, including the 
implementation of rules and regulations.  Racetrack 
officers actually operate the racetrack and report to the 
organizing committee's Director of Operations.  The 
racetrack officers' responsibilities specifically include 
jockey control. 
 
Camels and Camel Racing: Part of UAE Culture and Heritage 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶22.  (U) Khamees stated that camel racing is a "dear part 
of UAE culture", which President Zayid is committed to 
maintaining.  (Note: This sentiment regarding camel racing 
has been expressed by all of our contacts. End note.)  In 
the past, camels were an essential part of the economy and 
lives of Emiratis; camels were used to transport goods, 
served as currency, and were a source of meat, milk, 
leather and wool (used for weaving).  The number of camels 
an individual owned determined his prestige, power, and 
social status.  Khamees noted that many Emiratis from all 
walks of life, from shaykhs to the Bedu, sill own and breed 
camels and often participate in camel races.  Consequently, 
the breeding and trade in camels remains today a big 
business in the UAE, especially for the Bedu. 
 
ALBRIGHT