This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 COLOMBO 001888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (CAMP, WALLER) SA/PD (SCHWARTZ, SCENSNY, REINCKENS) 
SSA/PAS 
 
E.O.12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PTER OPRC KMDR OIIP CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  SRI LANKAN MEDIA RESPOND TO LTTE 
COUNTERPROPOSALS 
 
 
¶1. On 11/1 the LTTE unveiled its long-await response to the 
GSL's Interim Administration proposals (see septel).  The 
LTTE counterproposal elicited immediate and enormous press 
coverage.  Some headlines covered straightforward 
reportage:  "LTTE hands over IA proposals; copies to 
President and party leaders today," said the independent 
Sinhala weekender, LANKADEEPA.  "LTTE proposes 'Interim 
Self-Governing Authority' in united Sri Lanka," said the 
government-owned English weekender, SUNDAY OBSERVER.  Other 
headlines covered more provocative responses, however. 
"Tigers want lion's share of power," said the independent 
English weekender, SUNDAY ISLAND.  The government-owned 
Tamil weekender, SUNDAY THINAKARAN, quoted Tamil leader V. 
Tamilchelvan as saying:  "we will not be able to find a 
solution satisfying chauvinist forces."  And the 
independent English weekender, SUNDAY TIMES, used several 
bristly headlines:  "LTTE seeks sweeping powers," "PA, JVP 
to plan joint action tonight," "LTTE proposals 
'unacceptable':  [Rauff] Hakeem," "Swift, angry reaction 
from JVP," and "Big gap, but government calls for talks." 
 
¶2. Other headlines: 
 
- DINAMINA (government-owned Sinhala daily):  "LTTE 
proposals handed over to the government; President and 
other party leaders to be given copies as soon as 
possible." 
 
- LAKBIMA (independent Sinhala daily):  "Unofficial talks 
on Interim Administration next week" and "LTTE proposals 
handed over to government through Norwegian Ambassador." 
 
- SILUMINA (government-owned Sinhala weekender):  "LTTE 
says yes to devolution of power within one country-agree to 
devolve power under the 13th amendment" and "Discrepancies 
exist:  ready to minimize through talks, says ... G. L. 
Peiris. 
 
- SUNDAY LEADER (independent English weekender): 
"Government committed to direct talks with LTTE - [G. L.] 
Peiris." 
 
- SUNDAY THINAKURAL (independent Tamil weekender):  "Draft 
framework different from government proposals," 
"Tamilchelvan:  duty of government and international 
community act on realities of proposals" and "Tamilchelvan: 
interim self-government authority will provide environment 
to solve problems peacefully." 
 
- VIRAKESARI (independent Tamil daily):  "LTTE is 
requesting interim self-government authority," "Tiger 
proposals differ from government proposals - Peiris," 
"Tamilchelvan:  solution . cannot be found in Sri Lanka 
constitution," and "draft framework does not address Muslim 
aspirations - Hakeem." 
 
¶3. Editorials and op-eds.  Five weekenders carried 
editorials and/or op-ed pieces on the counter proposal. 
The SUNDAY ISLAND, Sri Lanka's most consistently dyspeptic 
observer of the peace process, ran an editorial under the 
headline "The Long Haul" and an op-ed piece provocatively 
titled "Eelam's soft opening:  unveiling the interim 
administration."  The government-owned SUNDAY OBSERVER 
countered with an editorial under the headline "Re- 
integration."  "Devolution or Eelam" asked the SUNDAY 
TIMES.  An editorial in THINAKURAL called the 
counterproposal a "door to freedom for Tamil-speaking 
people"  THINAKARAN called the counterproposals a "hopeful 
start after a long interval."  And VIRAKESARI wondered 
editorially:  "What will the Sinhalese ruling majority do?" 
Excerpts follow: 
 
- SUNDAY ISLAND editorial:  "The long haul."  "So the 
LTTE's proposals are finally in and the long haul must now 
begin reconciling what is possible with what is demanded 
within a framework of reality..  The Tigers were widely 
expected to pitch their demands sky high.  It's not as bad 
as the fatalists anticipated but is not a cause for 
cheering judging by a government statement issued last 
morning which spoke of the 'disparities of the positions of 
the parties' and the admission that the LTTE vision of a 
framework for a political solution 'differs in fundamental 
respects' from the government's proposals.  It is well 
within the bounds of probability that the LTTE crafted its 
present demands using the Chelvanayakam dictum, 'something 
now, more later.'  ... the new Thalaivar in the Wanni is in 
an entirely different league and playing for massively 
different stakes.  He is backed not only by heavy 
artillery, battle hardened cadres and all the other 
appurtenances of a modern army, but also a fanatically 
motivated corps of suicide killers who have time and again 
proved their prowess.  ... this country obviously cannot 
return to war and the military option is no option at all. 
Whatever our politics, that is a reality we must live with 
and the absolute bottom line.  Negotiations therefore must 
proceed despite the many landmines along the way.... 
Meanwhile the serious business of reaching the necessary 
accommodations to begin realizing the full potential of the 
available international goodwill for the reconstruction and 
rehabilitation of the war devastated areas as well as 
reviving the national economy must begin." 
 
- SUNDAY ISLAND op-ed:  "Eelam's soft opening:  unveiling 
the interim administration."  "As we wait for the IA 
proposals to be unmasked this weekend, and received with 
predictable ecstasy by the GOSL, let us decode Balasingham. 
The LTTE's objective is to legalise their rogue occupation 
of the north and east, clearing the decks for UDI whenever 
they choose.  And Tamilchelvam, to make sure the IA will be 
an offer the GOSL can't refuse, has made it clear that the 
IA comes with an ultimatum attached -- accept, or face war 
and secession." 
 
- SUNDAY OBSERVER editorial:  "Re-integration."  "The 
current peace process seems to have reached a certain 
maturity in that both sides have now presented substantive 
positions that can be taken up for intensive discussion, 
clarification, reasoning, bargaining and collective 
agreement.  At last both sides know, at least broadly, what 
each side wants and is also prepared to acknowledge as the 
parameters for negotiation.  Now, it is to be hoped that 
both the Government's as well as the LTTE's documents will 
come to be used as a common basis for reaching agreement. 
It will necessarily be a slow process in which agreement is 
reached on the various aspects of the process of political 
settlement as and when they are taken up for negotiation. 
That there may be crucial differences between the 
Government's and LTTE's positions is also very relevant, 
especially in envisaging the length and complexity of the 
negotiations that lie ahead.  But once the negotiations 
revive, it is to be hoped that the negotiators from both 
sides, and mediators, use both sets of proposals as a 
common resource of ideas from which both sides could take 
up elements to meet the various needs that must be 
addressed in a final settlement." 
 
- SUNDAY TIMES editorial:  "Devolution or Eelam."  "And so, 
hatched and incubated with much fanfare, we have the LTTE's 
proposals for a Provincial Self-Administration under their 
command in Sri Lanka's North and East provinces.  The UNF 
Government leadership could well have been taken aback by 
these proposals that call for an extra-Constitutional 
exercise to hand the LTTE virtual self-rule.  The 
Government Spokesman and Chief Negotiator has already 
conceded that the 'disparities between the positions are 
evident' and while reiterating a firm commitment to a 
negotiated settlement, he sees that the shock to an 
increasingly disturbed South is cushioned....  No doubt 
these are matters up for negotiation now.  It is a well 
established practice that when going in for negotiations 
one must ask for the maximum plus plus.  So, the Government 
negotiators will now need more than a cool head and a warm 
heart.  They will need a strong stomach for tough 
bargaining in the months ahead, quite apart from a need to 
hone in on their negotiating skills.  But if there is one 
thing that the Government must take the rap for in 
permitting the LTTE make these grandiose claims, it is that 
they allowed things to fester during the period of the 
Ceasefire from February last year uptodate.  They allowed 
banks, courts, taxation, IGPs, Chief Justices as they did 
the military build-ups, while they ignored the Muslim 
resentment.  Now comes the hard grind to undo all these -- 
or give in..  The question that would linger nevertheless, 
is whether the LTTE by accepting devolution has given up 
its goal of a separate state, or whether this Interim 
arrangement is simply the stepping stone for that separate 
state." 
 
THINAKURAL editorial:  "Door to freedom for Tamil-speaking 
people"  "The LTTE counterproposal is a door to freedom for 
the Tamil-speaking people.  The LTTE has proclaimed that 
they are not enemies of democracy, but are engaged in an 
effort at national peace.  The racist opposition and the 
President should look to the future of this country with 
vision and far sightedness.  The LTTE proposals are not 
communal in any way.  The international community is aware 
of the travails of the Northeast.  Now the Sinhalese 
people, too, are aware that the armed struggle that took 
place was not against their government and its army of 
aggression." 
 
THINAKARAN editorial:  "Hopeful start after a long 
interval."  "After seven months of stalled peace talks, a 
hopeful new start has begun.  The LTTE has presented its 
counterproposals.  A movement, which has conducted a 20- 
year armed struggle against the government has offered 
interim administration proposals to relieve the problems of 
the people in a peaceful manner....  Many quarters have 
accepted the fact that ... an interim administration in the 
Northeast with full powers is necessary before a permanent 
political solution is achieved....  Further, both parties 
have assured the Muslims that their aspirations will not be 
discarded. 
 
VIRAKESARI editorial:  "What will the Sinhalese ruling 
majority do?"  "The LTTE has handed over their 
counterproposals.  This is an important event not only in 
the history of the Tamils but in Sri Lankan ethnic history 
as well....  The Tamils had earlier hoped to settle issues 
with Sinhalese leaders without exposing the hegemony of the 
Sinhalese Buddhists.  But these counterproposals are 
powerful enough to expose Sinhalese Buddhist domination.... 
Many political analysts believe that Sri Lanka's 
Constitution is bankrupt, and that the LTTE proposals are a 
formidable challenge. 
 
ENTWISTLE