This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 001134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
COMMERCE FOR ITA JEAN KELLY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PINS BM
SUBJECT: BURMA: NEW ARRESTS ON CAMPUS 
 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: Post has received information that Rangoon 
police arrested seven university students on July 14 for 
attempting to reopen the Rangoon University Student Union and 
are holding them in Insein prison   The Junta's repressive 
actions at the smallest signs of student political activity 
indicates its continued fear of organized dissent on campuses 
and its continued willingness to use strong tactics to 
instill fear in other students.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C)  On September 13 Pol Off learned from a reliable 
source that the Burmese police had arrested seven 
Rangoon-area university students on July 14 for trying to 
reopen the Rangoon University Student Union, which had been 
de-registerd and dynamited by former dictator General Ne Win 
in July, 1962.  The students were held incommunicado until 
September 12 when the Special Branch of the Police 
Intelligence Wing notified the parents of the arrested 
students of their pending prosecutions.  The students remain 
in Rangoon's Insein prison, waiting for their trials to start. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The GOB plans to prosecute the students under 
Section Five of the Emergency Provisions Act of 1950, which 
prohibits spreading false news or undermining the Union. 
They are also being charged under the Press and Publication 
Acts which prohibit circulating uncensored documents, and the 
Organization Acts which prohibit the reforming of a banned 
organization.  Their trials are expected to begin within a 
week, will likely be short and result in guilty verdicts with 
immediate sentencing of 7-20 years.  The arrested student's 
names are: 
 
Aung Gyi, 19, 2nd yr law major, Dagon Univ 
Nann Shin Mong, 19,  2nd yr law major, Dagon Univ 
Myo Than Tun, 19, 2nd yr econ major, Ywathargyi Univ 
Myo Min Thu, 19, 1st yr chemistry, Dagon Univ 
Zaw Min Lwin, 19, 1st yr chemistry, Dagon Univ 
Aug Ko Oo, 19, 1st year, Institute of Nautical Science 
Kyaw Maung, 20, 3rd yr econ, Ywathargyi Univ 
Martinez