This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 SANAA 001455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2013 
TAGS: PARM MARR PREL MNUC MASS KN YM MARITIME SECURITY
SUBJECT: U/S BOLTON'S VISIT TO YEMEN: MEETINGS WITH FOREIGN 
MINISTER,  MOD CHIEF OF STAFF, AND DEMINING AUTHORITY 
 
Classified By: Charge Alan G. Misenheimer for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  Begin summary:  During a day of official meetings on 
June 17, Under Secretary for Non-Proliferation and 
International Security John R. Bolton met with Foreign 
Minister Abubaker al-Qirbi and MOD Chief of Staff Major 
General Mohammed al-Qasami to discuss Yemen's relations with 
the DPRK and to encourage the ROYG to sign an Article 98 
agreement (FM Qirbi Article 98 conversation reported septel). 
 Minister of State Qassim Ahmed al-Ajjam also briefed U/S 
Bolton on Yemen's humanitarian demining program and the 
impact of U.S. participation on its success.  During his 
visit to Yemen, U/S Bolton also met with President Saleh and 
his atomic energy advisor, Dr. Bahran -- see septels.  End 
summary. 
 
---------------------- 
Foreign Minister Qirbi 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  U/S Bolton, accompanied by Charge, Special 
Assistant Mark Groombridge, Jodie Green,OSD, and PolOff, 
began his meeting with Foreign Minister Abubaker al-Qirbi by 
discussing North Korea's nuclear program.  Bolton noted that 
since last summer's confirmation of the DPRK,s 
proliferation, the USG has worked hard to promote peaceful 
nuclear disarmament.  Unfortunately, he added, the DPRK has 
progressively escalated the conflict.  The USG will continue 
to pursue a diplomatic solution, but, the flow of money which 
is funding the DPRK,s nuclear program must be reduced, if 
not stopped entirely.  To this end, the U.S. is forming a 
partnership of people around the world to denounce the 
DPRK,s unacceptable behavior.  Yemen's participation in this 
partnership is very important because of ROYG SCUD missile 
purchases from the DPRK, highlighted by last year's So San 
incident.  Bolton said that it is time for Yemen and the U.S. 
to place pressure on the DPRK and deny it the ability to 
amass WMDs. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Bolton expressed his belief that a way can be 
found to deal peacefully with the DPRK.  Citing a recent 
conference in Madrid, Bolton noted that the U.S. is prepared 
to do more than just ask countries to cut off aid and stop 
transactions.  During the meeting in Madrid, eleven 
countries, all willing to bear the associated financial 
burden, are preparing to conduct operations to intercept 
suspect shipments from the DPRK.  However, it would be less 
problematic if there were no purchases at all.  Because of 
DPRK,s record of continued deception, the U.S. is concerned 
about the sale of WMDs, including plutonium and uranium.  The 
U.S. goal is to shut down DPRK sales of weapons and drugs, by 
working with Yemen and others in the region. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Yemen and the DPRK - No Love Story 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Foreign Minister Qirbi said that ROYG has been 
following the DPRK WMD problem and is ready to cooperate with 
the U.S.  There is no love between ROYG and North Korea: the 
relations are pragmatic, based on the low cost North Korea 
offers on arms and construction.  Qirbi stressed that the 
last shipment of SCUDS to Yemen was in December 2002, and 
ROYG is not upgrading the SCUDS in its possession.  There is 
an outstanding order for spare parts, totaling about $3-4 
million, and ongoing negotiations with DPRK for the 
construction of naval base. (Qirbi quickly added that ROYG is 
open to alternatives on the latter.) 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  Qirbi also said that ROYG has no interest in 
providing the DPRK with any money for the development of 
WMDs, particularly in light of the threat to Japan - a major 
donor to Yemen.  Bolton noted that the U.S. has talked to 
China and Russia on this issue.  The U.S. is in a race to 
resolve the problem before the DPRK,s weapon status becomes 
even more advanced. 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  Qirbi responded by noting that ROYG still needs 
to explore ways in to develop their coastal defense in the 
absence of the DPRK.  While the problem of the Yemen-Saudi 
border is being addressed by new security agreements with the 
Saudis, Yemen has over 2,000 kilometers of coastline which is 
difficult to control and must be secured.  Before 
unification, Yemen had a limited naval capacity, and 
currently has almost none.  The estimated cost for a new 
naval base in Aden or Hodeidah was $80-100 million.  U/S 
Bolton expressed an interest in pursuing this issue further. 
-------------------------------------- 
MOD Chief of Staff Qasami and the DPRK 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  U/S Bolton was originally scheduled to meet with 
Minister of Defense Abdullah Ali Aliwa, who was called away 
on short notice in response to a border incident near Marib 
(septel).  Chief of Staff Major General Qasami began by 
apologizing for the Minister,s absence while noting ROYG,s 
satisfaction with U.S.-Yemen cooperation in the war against 
terror.  Training by U.S. forces has greatly improved 
Yemen,s capabilities and with time, will advance them even 
more. 
¶8.  (S/NF)  U/S Bolton noted that, while the U.S. has no 
intention of infringing upon Yemen,s legitimate defense 
needs, it is important that the U.S. and Yemen work together 
to cut off the flow of funding for the DPRK,s nuclear 
program.  The U.S., he said, seeks a firm political agreement 
that Yemen will have no additional procurement from the DPRK, 
and will work with the U.S. to monitor and exchange 
information on the DPRK and their sales in the Middle East. 
 
¶9.  (S/NF)  Qasami noted that ROYG has discussed this issue 
before, notably with Secretary Powell, and hopes the U.S. 
understands Yemen's position.  The purchase of the SCUDS was 
initiated in 1994 just before Yemen's civil war.  ROYG 
subsequently asked for the money back, but, he said, the 
request was ignored.  In the end ROYG decided to take the 
SCUDS. Qasami emphasized that no more SCUDS will be purchased 
and the ROYG will not upgrade those it already possesses. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Negotiations with DPRK for a Navy Base 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (S/NF)  Reviewing the same list of ongoing matters as FM 
Qirbi, Qasami mentioned an agreement with the DPRK for 
maintenance of missiles and coastal defenses and negotiations 
on the possible construction of a naval base. U/S Bolton 
noted that the U.S. would like to cut off these transactions 
as well, and asked about alternative bidders -- perhaps from 
Eastern Europe.  Qasami replied that ROYG looked at Eastern 
European contractors but they were expensive and they all 
wanted cash.  As for the contract for maintenance of coastal 
defenses, that had been signed and partially paid, but the 
amount -- about seven million dollars-- is not large.  The 
ROYG will stop that contract, he offered, if the U.S. will 
reimburse them. 
 
¶11.  (C)  COS Qassimi again noted that ROYG will stop 
negotiations with the DPRK for the naval base if the U.S. is 
willing to assist.  He lamented the many problems facing ROYG 
-- smuggling, Somali refugees, drug trafficking, and illegal 
fishing -- as well as the lack of the facilities and 
equipment necessary to deal with them.  What happened to the 
Cole and the Limberg must not happen again, but the ROYG 
needs U.S. assistance to prevent future terrorist attacks. 
U/S Bolton replied that he did not question the ROYG,s 
assessment of their needs; the U.S. is prepared to work with 
Yemen and others interested in solving the North Korean 
problem. 
 
-------------------------- 
The MOD View of Article 98 
-------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (C)  Article 98:  Qasami noted that the Article 98 issue 
was being worked between the MFA and the Ministry of Legal 
Affairs.  If they ask the MOD for advice, he would support an 
agreement.  Charge added that this should be an important 
issue for MOD because if Yemen ratifies the ICC before 
signing an Article 98 agreement, it will result in the loss 
of military funding.  Qasami concluded by expressing his 
appreciation for U.S cooperation on military assistance and 
demining, noting that 95% of demining staff are recruits from 
the MOD. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Demining: Successful Program with "A Long Way to Go" 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶13.  (C)  Minister of State and Chairman of the National Mine 
Action Committee (NMAC) Qassim Ahmed al-Aajam thanked U/S 
Bolton for United States support to the ROYG's humanitarian 
demining program.  American assistance was the "fundamental 
basis" for demining's achievements over the past few years, 
but continued USG engagement was crucial.  Mansour al-Azi, 
the Executive Director of the NMAC, gave a presentation on 
Yemen's humanitarian demining program overall and the impact 
of U.S. contributions specifically.  After the presentation, 
U/S Bolton spoke about the long-term needs of the demining 
program, and  offered to check the status of current USG 
funding for Yemen upon his return to Washington. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Development: The Key to Security in Yemen 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (C)  Development was the main topic during U/S Bolton's 
lunch with Ahmad Soufan, Deputy Prime Minister/Minister of 
Development and International Cooperation, Foreign Minister 
Qirbi and Charge.  Soufan and Qirbi both emphasized that 
progress in development was the key to security and stability 
in Yemen.  Development is the most important issue for the 
people of Yemen, because they need hope for the future and 
progress they can see in their daily lives.  Qirbi also 
raised the Millennium Challenge Account, noting that Yemen is 
on the list of eligible countries.  Both Ministers were 
relaxed and cordial during the lunch, and thanked U/S Bolton 
for coming to Yemen.  Soufan emphasized that U.S. visitors do 
not come to Yemen frequently enough. 
 
MISENHEIMER