This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001440 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, DS/OP/NEA, DS/DSS, DS/ITA, 
DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CJTF HOA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/22/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC PGOV YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: ATTACK ON ROYG MEDICAL ASSISTANCE CONVOY IN ABYAN 
GOVERNORATE 
 
Classified By: Charge d'Affaires Alan G. Misenheimer for Reasons 1.5 (b 
,d) 
 
 ¶1.  (C)  Summary:  A ROYG-protected medical assistance 
convoy was attacked by unknown forces in Abyan governorate on 
June 21.  Reports of deaths and injuries differ, with the 
highest estimate at five dead.  No Amcits or other foreigners 
were involved.  The motive for the attack is yet unknown, and 
no one has claimed responsibility.  Embassy will continue to 
seek further information.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  The PSO has provided additional information on 
the attack that will be reported via ORCA channels. 
 
------------------------------ 
What We Know -- Where and When 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C)  All sources agree that the attack occurred on a 
medical assistance convoy traveling in the Sarar district in 
Abyan governorate in the early afternoon of June 21.  This 
area of Abyan governorate, to the northeast of Aden, is 
well-known as an area in which the recently dormant 
Aden-Abyan Islamic Army (AAIA) has occasionally operated in 
the past. The convoy consisted of two vehicles, both with Red 
Crescent markings and Defense Ministry license plates, with 
approximately seven Yemeni military medical personnel heading 
to Sarar to provide humanitarian assistance. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
What We Cannot Confirm -- 
Details/Results of Attack, Who and Why 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Most reports indicate an attack by rocket 
propelled grenades and AK-47s by an unknown number of 
assailants.  DMI sources told DATT that both RPGs and 
explosives were used.  Reports of deaths and injured differ. 
Ministry of Interior told RSO that seven were injured but 
none dead, and PSO contacts told Pol/Mil a similar story. 
However, DMI contacts told DATT that five were killed, which 
concurs with what the Governor of Abyan told the PSO liaison 
to Force Protection Detachment (FDP) Chief, who was in Aden. 
 
¶5.  (C)  The identity and motivation of the attackers remains 
unconfirmed.   PSO liaison told the FPD Chief that the 
Governor of Abyan presumed it was remnants of the AAIA who 
attacked the convoy, believing it was about to attack them. 
AP correspondent Ahmed al-Haj (please protect) told Pol FSN 
that his sources said the attackers numbered about 20 and 
were remnants of the AAIA. 
 
------------- 
Press Reports 
------------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  Official government daily al-Thawra reported on the 
attack, quoting an official source at the Ministry of 
Interior to Saba news agency.  The source said, "yesterday at 
about 11 am, and while a group of Yemeni doctors and their 
assistants belonging to the military medical services was 
providing medical services to the citizens in the region of 
Habban of Sarar district, Abyan governorate, a group of armed 
persons fired on the doctors' vehicles and their assistants 
which resulted in the injury of seven persons, a doctor, five 
assistants and the driver...."  The source indicated that 
security forces are tracking down the criminals to bring them 
to justice.  The Ministry of Interior urges citizens to 
cooperate with the security forces "to seize these criminals 
who committed this awful act by attacking people who are 
rendering humanitarian medical services to citizens." 
 
¶7.  (U)  Independent newspaper al-Ayyam reported the 
statement above, adding another statement from the local 
council in Sarar district.  The statement condemns the 
"criminal terrorist act" and says the presence of these 
groups (the perpetrators) in this region is strange.  It also 
said that "these groups camped in the area. . .prior to the 
parliamentary elections of this year, and they were carrying 
out some provocative acts, firing on vehicles and tearing 
down pictures of candidates." 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  The attack was not directed at Amcits or other 
foreigners, and occurred in a remote area previously 
associated with violent acts by the AAIA.  While there is no 
basis for viewing this as the opening of a new campaign 
rather than an isolated incident, the attack could 
nevertheless have implications for overall security in Yemen. 
 Yemeni authorities have been forthcoming with information, 
and Post will continue to follow events closely.  End Comment. 
MISENHEIMER