This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001136 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
BANGKOK FOR WIN DAYTON 
DS/OP/AF 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PINR ASEC ZI
SUBJECT: MDC IN RETREAT - MASS ACTION DAY THREE 
 
REF: A. HARARE 1122 
 
     ¶B. HARARE 1101 
     ¶C. HARARE 1097 
     ¶D. HARARE 1081 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) Youth militia members in military garb beat MDC 
activists, mostly in Harare's high-density suburbs on the 
night of June 3 - 4.  The Minister of Foreign Affairs 
delivered a prepared statement to the diplomatic community 
condemning the international community for its double 
standard toward the GOZ and the MDC.  This week's events have 
left the MDC in disarray and panic, and will likely cause 
them to re-think their strategy in the coming weeks.  End 
Summary. 
 
MDC Activists Beaten 
-------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) According to MDC Presidential Advisor, Gandi 
Mudzingwa, what appeared to be youth militia members in 
military vehicles, with military garb and some carrying AK-47 
assault rifles beat numerous MDC activists in high-density 
areas around Harare, and at the University of Zimbabwe on the 
night of June 3 - 4.  Mudzingwa reported that 21 people had 
sought medical help from the MDC's social welfare office.  On 
June 4, Poloff visited the casualty ward of the Avenues 
Clinic in central Harare and saw 30 or so persons in the 
waiting room with casts on their arms, bloodied bandages on 
their hands, and various visible cuts and bruises.  According 
to the Matron on duty, Elizabeth Sibotshiwe, Avenues had 
about 15 more cases than usual of soft tissue injuries (what 
equates to a 50 percent increase)--an increase similar to the 
last MDC led stayaway.  The injuries were consistent with 
baton blows; most were minor, only one so far would 
necessitate an overnight stay. 
 
¶3. (C) (Comment: If 15 extra people from the high density 
areas made it all the way to the center of town to the 
Avenues clinic, and 21 made it to the MDC offices - with 
petrol and transportation shortages as they are, and assuming 
many may not be seeking medical attention - we would guess 
the total number of those beaten in the Harare area to be 
much higher.  End Comment.) 
 
One Dead 
-------- 
 
¶4. (C) According to the MDC Information Department and 
Mudzingwa police abducted Sydney Mazaranhanga, an MDC 
councilor from Mbare, and Tichaona Kaguru, an MDC activist, 
from Mazaranhanga's home on the night of June 3.  Police beat 
the two severely, and released them in Mabvuku.  Kaguru died 
of injuries sustained on June 4.  Although the MDC 
Information Department also reported that 2 people were 
killed in Highfield on Monday, and 3 students were killed at 
UZ on the night of June 3 - there has been no independent 
confirmation of those deaths. 
 
¶5. (C) Mudzingwa said the MDC had no concrete plans to 
attempt more marches this week.  He said some hoped for a 
march in Harare on June 6, but with activists beaten they 
were in panic and disarray and would be unlikely to pull it 
off. 
 
MFA Criticizes West 
------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) The Minister of Foreign Affairs delivered a prepared 
statement at a briefing for chiefs of diplomatic missions on 
June 4 condemning the international community for supporting 
the MDC's illegal mass action.  The statement criticized the 
international community's double standard of condemning the 
GOZ for subverting the rule of law, while it turned a blind 
eye as the MDC subverted a high court order by staging a mass 
action which resulted in the death of a ZANU-PF supporter in 
Mbare.  The statement was critical of the June 3 G8 
statement, but applauded the recent Mbeki, Obasanjo, Muluzi 
"African" initiative to find solutions to Zimbabwe's problems. 
 
Stayaway Losing Ground 
---------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Driving around Harare on June 4, Poloffs observed that 
only about 50 percent of shops in downtown Harare, and 90 
percent of businesses in the light industrial areas of Harare 
were closed.  Pedestrian and vehicle traffic in downtown 
Harare seemed almost normal.  Activity in the high-density 
suburb of Mbare seemed normal. 
¶8. (SBU) One or two groups of 3 police officers were visible 
in downtown Harare on June 4; they assumed very relaxed 
postures. 
 
¶9. (C) According to Sheba Dube, head of the Bulawayo chapter 
of Women of Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA) about 50 percent of 
businesses in downtown Bulawayo were closed on June 4, and 
there was light vehicle and pedestrian traffic in Bulawayo. 
According to Richard Pope, a furniture manufacturer in 
Bulawayo, about 25 percent of his workers did not show up on 
June 4.  His factory was open, but running at reduced 
capacity.  He said many other factories nearby were 
theoretically "open", i.e. they would tell inquiring police 
they were open; however, due to worker shortages they were 
not actually operating. 
 
¶10. (C) Due to the difficulties the MDC was experiencing in 
maintaining the stayaway, Mudzingwa said the MDC may call the 
stayaway a victory in tomorrow's press and allow businesses 
to reopen. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶11. (C) Through a predictable campaign of violence on the 
night of June 3 - 4, the GOZ had the MDC in even faster 
retreat on June 4 with the possibility of street 
demonstrations all but eliminated, and the stayaway barely 
holding.  Mudzingwa's admission that their structures are in 
disarray and panic suggests the MDC may have to re-think 
their strategies carefully as the GOZ appears to be coming 
out ahead after this week's events.  End comment. 
SULLIVAN