This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/28/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS TU IZ
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S INITIAL CALL ON FONMIN GUL: FOCUS ON 
IRAQ, MIDDLE EAST, CYPRUS, ARMENIA, TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman; reasons: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: FonMin Gul said Aug. 27 the GOT wants a 
democratic, stable Iraq able to govern itself; GOT will move 
cautiously toward a decision on possible troop contribution 
to stabilization force; U.S. response to Turkey's concerns on 
PKK/Kadek remains a key point for Ankara.  Reaffirming U.S. 
commitment to a strategic relationship, Ambassador reiterated 
U.S. hope for a Turkish troop contribution in Iraq; urged 
renewed GOT efforts for a Cyprus settlement based on Annan 
III and normalized relations with Armenia; cautioned against 
a P.M. Erdogan trip to Iran, especially before making a trip 
to Washington or Tel Aviv; and called for continued Turkish 
progress on trafficking in persons and child abduction.  End 
summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Warmly welcoming the Ambassador Aug. 27, FonMin Gul 
said Turkey takes it as a reaffirmation of the importance 
Washington attaches to bilateral relations that the 
Administration would appoint someone who had been serving as 
a senior aide to the Vice President.  Although the two 
countries have experienced problems at times, it's been all 
in the family.  Most important is that Turkey and the U.S. 
share values: an attachment to democracy, human rights, and a 
market economy. Since what the U.S. wants to see in the rest 
of the world reflects these common values, Turkey will 
cooperate, even on difficult issues. 
 
 
---- 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
 
¶3. (C) In regard to shared values, Iraq is especially 
sensitive for Turkey and Turkey cannot remain indifferent, 
Gul said.  Turkey prefers a democratic, stable, free-market 
Iraq at peace with its neighbors, an Iraq in which a 
broad-based government rules its own country.  Therefore, the 
GOT has instructed the Turkish military to consult with its 
American counterparts and has dispatched fact-finding teams 
to Iraq.  At the same time, the GOT faces opposition in 
parliament and from the intellectual elite.  "I am doing my 
best to prepare public opinion, although it's not easy," Gul 
added.  Turkey is looking at Iraq as a whole.  However, 
Turkey has concerns in the north.  Moreover, elimination of 
the PKK/Kadek is essential and the U.S. must avoid a 
situation in which the PKK/Kadek misinterprets U.S. policy 
and avoids laying down its arms. 
 
 
¶4. (C) In emphasizing his goal of playing a constructive 
role, Ambassador responded that he has come as a friend of 
Turkey, bearing the message from President Bush, Vice 
President Cheney, and Secretary Powell that the U.S. and 
Turkey have an important strategic relationship which has 
withstood many tests over time.  Moreover, the President 
remains personally engaged in strongly supporting Turkey's EU 
candidacy. 
 
 
¶5. (C) On Iraq, the Ambassador noted newly arrived 
instructions reiterating President Bush's unshaken resolve in 
the face of recent terrorist attacks in Baghdad, Tel Aviv, 
and Jerusalem.  We are committed to remain in Iraq as long as 
it takes to stabilize the situation and to depart when a 
capable civilian government is in place.  We look forward to 
working with our friends and allies to achieve this goal.  In 
this context we would welcome a Turkish contribution to the 
stabilization force; we expect Turkey to make its decision 
based on its own calculation of national interests.  While we 
recognize Turkey's specific concerns in the northern part of 
Iraq, it is important to look at the situation as a whole and 
to create in Baghdad a government capable of disposing of the 
country's ample resources to the benefit of all.  We are 
trying to ease tensions in the north.  We are pleased at the 
better communication between the U.S. and Turkey, including 
the Bremer/Turkish delegation meeting in Baghdad, our 
provision of responses to cooperation proposals MFA U/S Ziyal 
presented in Washington in June, and Turkey's impending 
assumption of a place in the CIC.  Washington continues to 
work on our proposal for dealing with the PKK/Kadek in line 
with our commitment to end terrorism threats in any form from 
Iraq. 
 
 
---------------- 
MIDDLE/NEAR EAST 
---------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) We will remain engaged in a search for peace between 
Israelis and Palestinians, the Ambassador said.  In this 
effort it is important to shut down recruitment of terrorists 
and generation of financial sources for terrorism, especially 
by Hamas, to avoid disruption of the road map. 
 
 
¶7. (C) We appreciate the good U.S.-Turkish dialogue on Iran, 
the Ambassador noted.  U.S. concerns remain strong regarding 
Iran's nuclear program, in particular unanswered questions 
surrounding the fuel cycle, and the impending IAEA Board of 
Governors' meeting will be a key reference point.  We have 
also heard that P.M. Erdogan might be considering a visit to 
Iran.  Such a visit, especially before he makes a visit to 
the U.S. or Israel, could be construed in Washington as 
Turkey's seeking Iran's approval to join the stabilization 
force and in any event would have a deleterious effect on 
views of the GOT in the Administration and Congress. 
 
 
¶8. (C) Gul did not respond on the latter point.  On prospects 
for Middle East peace, he emphasized that, despite being 
disappointed by the deterioration in the climate, the GOT 
knows the U.S. remains committed to the road map.  Turkey 
wants to play a positive role and will soon make an 
announcement regarding the peace process. 
 
 
------ 
CYPRUS 
------ 
 
 
¶9. (C) With May 2004 bringing both Cyprus accession to the EU 
and a possible presidential visit in connection with the NATO 
summit in Istanbul, Ambassador pressed for renewal of Turkish 
attention this autumn to the search for a solution.   Annan 
III remains the best basis for a solution.  U.S. Special 
Cyprus Coordinator Weston plans to visit the region in 
October.  In the wake of this spring's CBMs, the will of the 
people on both sides is clearly for a settlement.  Political 
leaders on both sides should seize the opportunity.  The U.S. 
puts great emphasis on having December local elections in the 
north held freely and fairly, preferably with international 
monitors. 
 
 
¶10. (C) Gul declared that elections will definitely be fair. 
One should also expect new CBMs from the Turkish Cypriot 
side.  The GOT wants a settlement.  This problem cannot go on 
unsolved: "No solution is not a solution."  Turkey's concern, 
however, is that a settlement be realistic and lasting; the 
GOT could not afford to have a settlement unravel. 
 
 
------- 
ARMENIA 
------- 
 
 
¶11. (C) Noting the heavy expenditure of political capital by 
the Vice President and Secretary Powell to avert an Armenian 
genocide resolution, the Ambassador emphasized that it is 
getting harder and harder to deflect such language.  It is 
best to leave the question to historians.  But the issue is 
more manageable if Turco-Armenian talks proceed to the point 
where Turkey opens the border. 
 
 
¶12. (C) Asking that we treat the information as exceptionally 
sensitive, Gul noted that Turco-Armenian talks have been 
continuing on a periodic basis in Istanbul.  His meeting with 
Armenian FonMin Oskanyan in Madrid went well; the two plan to 
meet on the margins of the UNGA in late September.  At the 
same time it is important to have a smooth transition in 
Azerbaijan, which could help bring the three FonMins together 
in an effort to make progress on the question as a whole. 
 
 
---------------------- 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
---------------------- 
 
 
¶13. (C) In recalling that Washington will issue its decision 
in September on Turkey's TIP country classification, the 
Ambassador took note of Turkey's concrete progress in taking 
steps to combat TIP but cautioned that, whatever the 
classification turns out to be next month, it is essential to 
maintain progress. 
 
 
¶14. (C) Gul responded that Turkey is doing its best; the GOT 
is keen on pursuing TIP.  But Turkey has already achieved 
much progress and the GOT strongly hopes for a decision to 
move Turkey up from Tier III to Tier II. 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
HAGUE CONVENTION/CHILD ABDUCTION 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶15. (C) The U.S. is pleased Turkey has signed the Convention; 
now it is important to pursue enforcement.  The U.S. might be 
able to offer technical assistance or judicial exchanges in 
this regard.  The objective is to ensure that the highly 
combustible issue of child abduction is handled properly so 
that it does not interfere with our ability to focus on the 
strategic dimension of the bilateral relationship. 
 
 
¶16. (C) DirGen for the Americas Banguoglu responded that one 
child abduction case is now in the Turkish courts; we should 
await the decision. 
 
 
¶17.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
EDELMAN