This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ISTANBUL 001617 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/30/2013 
TAGS: PHUM TU CU
SUBJECT: ECUMENICAL PATRIARCH CONTEMPLATES CUBA VISIT 
 
 
REF: A. DEUTSCH/SILVERMAN/SMITH E-MAILS 
     ¶B. 10/30-31/2003 
 
 
Classified By: A/CG Stuart Smith for reason 1.4 (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Ecumenical Patriarchate leadership confirms 
that Patriarch Bartholomew is considering a trip to Cuba on 
January 21, 2004 to dedicate a new Orthodox Church.  Now 
aware of USG concerns about the trip, the Patriarch may 
reconsider.  Action request in para 5.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Poloff spoke with Metropolitan Meliton of Philadelphia 
on October 31, and raised the issue of a possible trip to 
Havana by Patriarch Bartholomew.  Meliton confirmed that the 
Patriarch has tentatively accepted such an invitation.  He 
asked for US views on the issue, explaining that the 
Patriarch would not want the trip to cause problems with the 
USG. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Poloff noted that we understand the Patriarch's good 
intentions in supporting the Orthodox Church in Cuba, and his 
desire to promote religious liberty.  However, a visit by the 
Patriarch might be used by Castro to "paper over" recent 
human rights abuses by the regime, or to undermine dissent by 
local Christians.  Thus, Poloff noted, a trip to Cuba by the 
Patriarch could cause a wrinkle in the long-standing 
USG-Patriarchate relationship. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Poloff said that the USG was eager to discuss this 
issue with the Patriarchate, and would welcome further, more 
authoritative discussion of the issue either through the 
Consulate General in Istanbul or the Embassy in Ankara. 
Meliton took careful note of all this and said that he would 
be writing a memo to the Patriarch immediately, and would 
have a response from the Patriarch no later than November 4. 
He said, however, the Patriarch would not want to do anything 
to harm our relationship.  Though Bartholomew had agreed 
verbally to the trip, no written confirmation has yet been 
sent. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Post will follow up with the Patriarchate November 4, 
and requests further talking points for subsequent 
discussions. 
SMITH