This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 005223 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
AIDAC 
 
FROM U.S. MISSION IN ROME 
 
USDA FOR SECRETARY VENEMAN, U/S/FAS PENN, MCHAMBLISS 
STATE FOR U/S LARSON, IO A/S HOLMES, EUR/WE, IO/EDA 
RBERHEND, E FOR CPENCE 
USAID FOR ADMINISTRATOR NATSIOS, AA/DCHA WINTER, D/DCHA/FFP 
LANDIS 
USUN FOR AMBASSADOR NEGROPONTE AND MLUTZ 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
BRUSSELS FOR USEU 
NSC FOR JDWORKEN 
 
E.O.  12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID AORC PREF EAGR ECON KUNR UN WFP
SUBJECT: WFP's Executive Director writes to the President on 
support for school feeding 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  WFP's Executive Director Jim Morris has written to 
President Bush a letter (reproduced below) requesting 
support for restoring the US contribution to global school 
feeding efforts to USD 300 million per year through the 
McGovern-Dole International Food for Education and Child 
Nutrition Program. End summary. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Text of letter of WFP Executive Director Jim Morris dated 
September 25 to the President of the United States 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2.  Begin text of WFP letter: 
 
"Dear Mr. President: 
 
Thank you so much for the kind words about the World Food 
Program in your recent statement to the General Assembly in 
New York.   All of us really appreciated the recognition. 
We are, in fact, quite proud of our achievements in helping 
prevent widespread hunger in Iraq as it seeks to rebuild. 
At its peak, our emergency operation there was moving 1,000 
tons of food an hour, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a 
week -- the most massive humanitarian operation in history. 
This would never have been possible without the strong 
commitment of the Bush Administration. 
 
I am writing you now on behalf of tens of millions of 
children who need your help and support even more than the 
people of Iraq.   Hungry children in the world's poorest 
countries need the same compassion and helping hand you have 
extended to America's children.   Worldwide there are still 
some 100-million school-age children who do not go to 
school, and 6 out of 10 are girls.  In several regions, the 
problem has worsened as children whose parents have HIV/AIDS 
are pulled out of school to help support their families.  At 
the same time, about 300 million children are chronically 
hungry, even if they are able to go to school. 
 
We can make solid progress against hunger and bring children 
into school at the same time if you are willing to commit 
the United States to multi-year and consistent funding of 
the Global School Feeding Initiative -- a bipartisan effort 
spearheaded by former Senators McGovern and Dole.  Despite 
your well-known commitment to children and education, US 
funds for this program have been subject to politically 
embarrassing cutbacks.  Several key school feeding programs 
in places such as Nicaragua, Colombia, Chad and Kenya were 
left unfunded this year because of the reduction in funds 
made available, and other donors have begun to question 
America's commitment. 
 
Restoring the US contribution to global school feeding 
efforts to USD 300 million per year through approval of 
supplemental funds for the McGovern-Dole International Food 
for Education and Child Nutrition Program would mean that 
WFP and other partners could provide school meals for 
millions more poor children worldwide than would otherwise 
be possible.  While US funding has decreased, the demand for 
school feeding has grown dramatically since the U.S. 
announced the initial contribution in 2000.  USDA reported 
that the proposals received from WFP and private voluntary 
organizations (PVOs) totaled about USD 1 billion (against a 
reduced funding of USD 100 million) for 2003.  It is clear 
that there is both the demand and the capacity to do much 
more; to reach millions more poor children in developing 
 
 
countries. 
 
School feeding has served as an incredible magnet for 
attracting children to school and keeping them there.  In 
Pakistan, for example, we have had increases of up to 300 
percent.   Responding to early United States General 
Accounting Office (GAO) recommendations, we have refined our 
projects and have managed to attract a substantial multi- 
year commitment from Canada and more donations from Europe 
as well.  The growing worldwide support for school feeding 
is a result of America's incredible leadership and 
commitment to the issue. 
 
I am certain that nearly everyone who seeks funding these 
days tries to tie their favorite program to the war on 
terrorism, but let me draw your attention to an article that 
appeared in Time magazine on 22 September on the dangerous 
political influence that some extremist madrasah schools 
have in Pakistan.  "`It's poverty and hunger that drive 
these students to the madrasahs,' says Aziz Ahmed Faruqi, 
who teaches in a Karachi seminary.  `If their stomachs 
weren't empty, they wouldn't come.'"  WFP and PVOs can use 
school feeding to attract students and offer an alternative 
in all schools with government-approved curriculums that do 
not foster extremism. 
 
We appreciate the tremendous pressure on the US Government's 
budget, but investing in children is surely the best 
investment we all can make. Sincerely, James Morris"   End 
text of WFP letter. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Personal Comment from Ambassador Tony Hall 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  I can attest to the truth of the Pakistani teacher's 
comments about poverty driving parents to send their kids to 
the madrasahs and learn the foundations of hate instead of 
basic education.  In a trip last year with Representatives 
Frank Wolf and Joe Pitts, we spoke directly with Pakistani 
and Afghan parents who wanted to send their children, 
including daughters, to schools where they would be fed. 
School feeding is clearly a positive tool in our efforts to 
prevent more terrorists from being trained. 
 
¶4.  In addition to meeting our strategic goals, school 
feeding is attracting more attention and funding from our 
allies.  WFP has received significant commitments for school 
feeding from Canada, Switzerland, Italy, Chile and Honduras 
(to name just a few).  WFP's research is showing positive 
results in increasing nutritional status and getting girls 
into school.  I strongly encourage a return to the USD 100 
million investment for the McGovern-Dole International Food 
for Education and Child Nutrition Program as stated in the 
2002 Farm Bill and contained in FY 2003 funding levels. 
Hall 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME05223 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED