This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000883 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS; OES/ENV 
COMMERCE FOR ITA:ABENAISSA 
KATHMANDU FOR EST HUB 
 
E.O 12958:N/A 
TAGS: SENV ECON EAID CE
SUBJECT: SRI LANKA SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVES AIR QUALITY 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Preliminary studies show a significant 
reduction in Colombo's ambient air lead levels after 
phasing out leaded gasoline in June, 2002.  The 
Government will further improve urban air quality by 
introducing new vehicle emission and fuel quality 
standards.  End Summary. 
 
NO MORE LEADED FUEL 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  Leaded gasoline had been a growing source of 
ambient air pollution in Sri Lanka's urban areas.  By 
2001, Sri Lanka was burning 244,000 metric tons of 
leaded gasoline.  According to estimates, 50% of the 
gasoline in Sri Lanka was consumed in Colombo, 
releasing approximately 25 tons of lead into the 
atmosphere annually.  As a result, lead pollution was 
a major health concern, with studies indicating high 
blood lead levels in Colombo residents compared to 
those in rural areas. 
 
¶3.  Implementation of existing air quality management 
laws and regulations was very slow, until recently. 
Lead-free gasoline was introduced in 1997 with a 
planned total phase-out by 2005.  Under the current 
government, the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) 
accelerated the plan by discontinuing the production 
and sale of leaded gasoline in mid-2002.  Although no 
detailed statistical analyses are available, a study 
sponsored by the USAID/US-Asia Environmental 
Partnership Program (US-AEP) showed ambient lead 
levels have dropped 80% six months after phasing out 
lead in gasoline. 
 
¶4.  Measures of particulate lead, from vehicle 
emissions and roads, burning of garbage, industrial 
emissions and soil, also show a declining trend when 
compared with historical data.  More importantly, 
according to preliminary studies, introduction of 
unleaded gasoline has contributed to a marked (86%) 
reduction in blood lead levels in traffic policemen. 
This indicates the magnitude of the health impact and 
the benefits of the lead reduction program. 
 
OTHER INITIATIVES 
----------------- 
 
¶5.  In order to facilitate the air quality management 
programs, an Air Quality Management Center (AirMac) 
was formed in November 2001 under the Ministry of 
Environment and Natural Resources.  Since then AirMac 
has been instrumental in improving stakeholder 
participation.  The present focus of the AirMac is on 
an accelerated program to implement emission 
standards in January 2004 and developing a Clean Air 
2005 action plan.  World Bank and USAID/US-AEP are 
the two major donors helping Sri Lanka air quality 
improvement programs. 
 
¶6.  A recent World Bank sponsored study co-ordinated 
by the AirMac found fine particulate matter as the 
air pollutant of greatest concern in urban areas. 
The high sulfur dioxide content, found mainly in 
diesel fuel is directly related to particulate matter 
level.  Poor vehicle maintenance practices, lack of 
vehicle testing programs, and the import of diesel 
vehicles (due to a petroleum pricing policy favoring 
diesel) have contributed to increased air pollution. 
Emissions of smoke and soot from diesel vehicles, and 
from petrol vehicles equipped with two stroke engines 
(the ubiquitous trishaws), are believed to be among 
the main sources of particulate matter emissions in 
urban areas. 
 
¶7.  The GSL hopes to reduce these pollutants through 
the new Clean Air 2005 action plan, which aims to 
reduce vehicle emissions and improve fuel quality. 
New emission standards will apply for all vehicles 
from July 1, 2003.  Euro II equivalent standards will 
apply for imports.  Less stringent emission standards 
will apply for in use vehicles from July 1, 2003 with 
the intention of moving towards Euro II and Euro III 
standards by 2007 and 2010, respectively. 
Arrangements to establish 200 vehicle-testing centers 
throughout the country are underway.  According to 
Transport Ministry sources, annual mobile emission 
certificates will be mandatory for all motor vehicles 
beginning in January 2004.  In addition, Sri Lanka is 
considering banning the importation of two stroke 
trishaws. 
 
¶8.  Also, new (Euro II equivalent) fuel quality 
standards will apply from July 1, 2003 for gasoline. 
Euro III standards will apply for gasoline in 2007. 
Diesel standards (now at Euro I) will also be 
improved gradually to Euro II and Euro III levels 
between 2004 and 2007, allowing adequate time for the 
CPC to launch fuel reformulation programs in its 
refinery.  The AirMac will launch an independent 
auditing mechanism to monitor standards of fuel 
available in the market.  In addition, the GSL is 
planning to launch a power plant emission-monitoring 
program and to carry out health impact assessments 
relating to air pollution. 
 
¶9.  US-AEP recently sponsored a fleet 
characterization study to measure emissions.  A 
remote sensing measurement technology developed by 
Environmental Systems Products, Tucson, AZ is being 
used for this study.  Results of this study will help 
in deciding priority vehicle types, makes and years 
of manufacture to phase in the emission standards in 
January 2004.  Understanding fleet characteristics is 
necessary to implement vehicle testing with minimum 
social and economic impediments for vehicle owners, 
and to avoid a potential political backlash on the 
air quality program. 
 
¶10.  Comment:  This is a field in which the 
combination of US and multilateral assistance with US 
technology has generated measurable improvements in 
the economy of Sri Lanka and the health of its 
citizens.  End Comment. 
 
Wills