This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 003351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV; PLEASE PASS TO PEACE CORPS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL VM HUMANR CVR RELFREE
SUBJECT: FOLLOWING UP ON DPM KHOAN VISIT WITH VFM BANG 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  Ambassador and Pol/C met with Vice 
Foreign Minister Le Van Bang on December 24 to follow up on 
issues from Deputy Prime Minister Vu Khoan's visit, about 
which the Vietnamese leadership appears clearly pleased. 
MFA will issue an invitation letter to Peace Corps.  MFA 
will also try to track down an invitation from the Ministry 
of Public Security for USG experts to visit.  MFA is still 
exploring the possibility of a Prime Ministerial visit in 
early 2004.  Bang lamented the latest International 
Religious Freedom report and its potential impact on 
relations.  He contrasted U.S. and Chinese strategies for 
Southeast Asia but agreed that Vietnam should host the next 
round of political dialogue to discuss these and other 
topics.  Septel will discuss Bang's good news on the New 
Embassy Compound.  End Summary. 
 
Peace Corps 
----------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Ambassador expressed congratulations on the 
successful visit to the U.S. of DPM Vu Khoan, which he 
praised as a "group effort" and about which he noted USG 
satisfaction.  VFM Bang noted the instrumental role played 
by Ambassador Burghardt and the Embassy in making this visit 
such a success and conveyed the GVN's thanks to all 
concerned. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Ambassador inquired about the GVN's plans for next 
steps vis--vis Peace Corps.  He expressed concerns about 
some apparent interest within the GVN in having an 
invitation stem from the Ministry of Education and Training 
(MOET), and noted that the Peace Corps' ultimate activities 
in Vietnam could likely be well beyond the mandate of MOET, 
even if volunteers might begin by teaching English to 
science and technology students.  VFM Bang immediately 
confirmed that the invitation should come from the MFA, 
since this was a "political" issue that should be "handled 
with care."  After expert talks, the GVN could decide 
whether the Peace Corps program would fall under MOET, the 
Vietnam Union of Friendship Organizations (VUFO), or some 
other agency, he said. 
 
Intel 
----- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Ambassador expressed interest in moving forward 
on DPM Khoan's apparent commitment to invite USG experts to 
return in January to meet with the Ministry of Public 
Security.  VFM Bang promised to "look into this," but 
reiterated that the invitation was up to MPS.  (Note: 
Embassy has contacted MPS twice but officials have not yet 
confirmed any such intention to move so quickly.  end note) 
 
Prime Minister 
-------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  VFM Bang expressed interest in continuing high 
level exchanges.  He recognized the difficulty of arranging 
a Prime Ministerial visit in 2004 due to U.S. elections, but 
nonetheless inquired about the possibility of a visit in the 
first quarter of 2004 (he later specified March or even 
April).  He emphasized, however, that he was not "pushing" 
for this to happen; if this would be difficult to arrange, 
the U.S. should simply let the MFA know.  Ambassador asked 
pointedly whether Prime Minister Khai would remain in 
office; if not, it would be difficult to sell the idea of a 
lame duck visit to the Administration.  VFM Bang responded 
only that "we will know for sure by the end of the year." 
 
¶6.  (U)  The Ambassador also stressed that favorable GVN 
decisions on big ticket items such as Vinasat (Lockheed 
Martin) and/or Boeing would also be helpful in getting 
agreement on a visit.  He noted, however, that 2005 might 
make much more sense, with the 10th anniversary of the 
establishment of bilateral diplomatic relations. 
 
Religious Freedom 
----------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  VFM Bang, noting a meeting in Washington with 
Ambassador-at-large for Religious Freedom Hanford, called 
the latest International Religious Freedom Report "not 
conducive" to better bilateral relations.  He said that the 
MFA had nonetheless decided not to "make a big sound" about 
it, apart from a short critical statement by the MFA 
spokesman.  He claimed that, overall, the GVN was "doing 
better" on this front.  He urged the Embassy to do a "better 
job" in getting accurate information.  Ambassador noted that 
the Embassy made every effort to collect accurate 
information from a wide variety of sources and to prepare a 
fair and comprehensive report that describes problems as 
they exist. 
 
The China card 
-------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The Ambassador also pointed to DPM Khoan's 
comments on China during his various discussions in 
Washington.  VFM Bang (who until recently was in charge of 
Northeast Asian relations) claimed that it was clear that 
the CCP's 16th Party Congress had agreed upon a "change of 
strategy" in which the PRC would be less inward-oriented and 
would reach out not only to Southeast Asia but also to 
Northeast Asia, Latin America, and Africa.  In Southeast 
Asia alone, he said that the RC was "into everything," 
describing the PRC as "aggressive" rather than merely 
"active."  He cited the China-ASEAN dialogue, the Free Trade 
Area, accession to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation, and 
proposed ASEAN Regional Forum military meetings.  He implied 
that U.S. engagement with and interest in Southeast Asia 
were weak in comparison. 
 
¶9.  (U)  Ambassador reiterated earlier USG observations 
welcoming growing Chinese ties throughout Southeast Asia and 
promising continued and expanded USG ties as well.  He urged 
that such topics be included in a future round of bilateral 
political dialogue, or policy planning dialogue, which it 
was the GVN's turn to host.  VFM Bang immediately instructed 
Assistant Foreign Minister Nguyen Duc Hung (who headed the 
GVN delegation to the 2002 political dialogue) to arrange 
for the MFA to make preparations for such an invitation to 
the USG. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  We have heard from various Vietnamese sources 
that the senior leadership was very pleased with DPM Khoan's 
visit and with the Ambassador's personal helpful role in 
particular.  A highlight for the Vietnamese appears to have 
been the meeting and meal with former President Bush, which 
apparently was seen as granting a sort of symbolic Confucian 
blessing on better U.S.-Vietnam ties. 
BELLARD