This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 001349 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/12/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ CA UNSC
SUBJECT: CANADIAN SUPPORT FOR LIFTING OF IRAQ SANCTIONS 
 
REF: STATE 122029 
 
Classified By: Pol MC Brian Flora for reasons 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) We conveyed points contained reftel on May 9 to Don 
Sinclair, Director General of DFAIT's Middle East and North 
Africa Bureau. Sinclair said Canada welcomed the news that 
the resolution to lift sanctions against Iraq had been 
introduced in the UN Security Council.  He indicated that 
Canada, though not a UNSC member, would support the effort. 
Sinclair said that Canadian officials would seek public 
opportunities to express their backing, but that DFAIT would 
probably not issue a separate press release. 
 
¶2. (C)  Sinclair said that now is the right time to begin the 
normalization process and described the U.S. approach to the 
wide range of issues surrounding Iraq as "practical, 
flexible, and pragmatic."  He emphasized it is important to 
Canada that the UN play a meaningful role in the process. 
With respect to the steps proposed in the resolution, he 
commented that the "devil is in the details."  If the current 
sanctions regime is lifted, Sinclair asked, would another set 
of sanctions or restrictions (on weapons procurement, for 
example) take its place, or would all sanctions against Iraq 
be ended? 
 
¶3. (C)  Sinclair raised several concerns/questions regarding 
the U.S. proposals.  What about Iraqi creditors, particularly 
Russia, China, and France, who would apparently be asked to 
agree to the freezing of debt repayment obligations?  He 
noted that the whole issue of letting the Iraqis determine 
their own future would be a major test.  Would the coalition 
partners accept unconditionally the final results of an Iraqi 
election?  He asked about the future role of UN weapons 
inspectors in Iraq; Canada felt it was important to 
reintroduce them into the mix. UNMOVIC had credibility with 
the international community and would lend greater trust to 
the final certification that Iraq was free of weapons of mass 
destruction. 
 
¶4. (C)  These were just his preliminary reactions, he 
emphasized, to what Canada saw as a positive step in getting 
the post conflict phase of Iraqi reconstruction under way. 
Canada looked forward to further elaboration of coalition 
plans and strategies. 
CELLUCCI