This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001453 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2013 
TAGS: MARR PARM PREL MNUC MASS KN YM COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: U/S BOLTON'S VISIT TO YEMEN: MEETING WITH 
PRESIDENTIAL ATOMIC ENERGY ADVISOR 
 
Classified By: Charge Alan G. Misenheimer for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin summary:  On June 17, Under Secretary John 
Bolton met with Dr. Moustafa Bahran, Chairman of the Yemeni 
National Atomic Energy Commission (NATEC) and science advisor 
to ROYG President Saleh.  Discussing the U.S. campaign to 
target and cut off revenue that funds North Korea's nuclear 
program, Bahran advised concentrating on the Ministry of 
Defense (MOD) and suggested the U.S. keep Yemen's development 
needs in mind.  Bahran outlined his work with the IAEA to 
secure nuclear materials and radioactive sources, proposed a 
joint Yemen-U.S.-UK-France resolution on the security of 
radioactive sources, and suggested a regional initiative to 
strengthen nuclear and radioactive controls.  End summary. 
 
---------------------- 
Yemen-DPRK Cooperation 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  During a working breakfast on June 17, U/S Bolton 
and the Chairman of Yemen,s National Atomic Energy 
Commission Dr. Moustafa Bahran discussed several issues, 
including Yemen's relationship with the DPRK.  Bolton noted 
that, while the U.S. is pursuing a diplomatic solution, it is 
also working to undermine the DPRK's nuclear program by 
stopping weapons sales and other transactions that provide 
funding.  Transit and purchasing countries, especially those 
in the Middle East, must say "No" to the DPRK.  He called 
Yemen the most important stop on his tour because of its 
known DPRK SCUD missile purchases, highlighted by the 
December 2002 interception of the So San cargo vessel.  The 
time has come for ROYG to join the international community in 
denouncing North Korea's unacceptable behavior. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Bahran said that Yemen-DPRK cooperation is purely 
a question of cost.  The U.S. must convince the Ministry of 
Defense (MOD), not the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), of 
the importance of this issue.  The MOD would have no problem 
working with the U.S. if convinced the U.S. offered 
affordable, realistic alternatives.   However, Bahran 
cautioned, if the price difference is too high, MOD will 
object. 
 
¶4. (S/NF) U/S Bolton suggested that the positive political 
gains of ending cooperation with the DPRK should also be 
calculated into the "final price".  The cooperation that led 
to resolution of the So San incident is only one example of 
the larger U.S.-Yemen partnership that the ROYG should take 
into consideration.  Bahran advised that if the USG shows 
consideration for Yemen's critical development needs, the 
DPRK problem would end. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  U/S Bolton said that during a recent meeting of 
11 countries in Madrid -- including Japan, a major donor to 
Yemen -- a decision was made to conduct more operations like 
the Spanish interdiction of the So San.  In light of the 
growing threat posed by North Korea's weapons program, Bolton 
noted these countries are willing to accept the burden of 
interdiction costs. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Security of Nuclear Materials and Radioactive Sources 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Bahran noted that, in December 2000, Yemen was one 
of the first countries to raise the issue of protection and 
physical security of radioactive sources (PSRS).  In 2002, 
Yemen co-drafted and co-sponsored IAEA resolution 
GC/46/Res/13.  While the resolution is adequate, it does not 
do enough to address PSRS.  Bahran then outlined his efforts 
to enlist support for the passage of a three-part resolution 
at September's IAEA General Conference covering illicit 
trafficking, nuclear materials, and radioactive sources.  He 
met with the French Nuclear Commission in May, and plans to 
approach his counterparts in the U.S. and the UK later this 
summer to garner support for the resolution.  U/S Bolton then 
offered to assist Bahran in scheduling a meeting with 
Secretary Abraham at the Department of Energy. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
------------------- 
Regional Initiative 
------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Bahran cited poor security in many Gulf states as 
the impetus for the formation of a regional authority to 
harmonize PSRS licensing and enforcement.  By contributing to 
regional security, a ROYG-led initiative might also help 
Yemen's bid to join the Gulf Cooperation Council.  Bahran 
said President Saleh would send him to talk to Gulf leaders, 
but ROYG would appreciate U.S. assistance to set the stage 
with the GCC.  U/S Bolton agreed to carry Bahran's ideas back 
to Washington, but again suggested he raise these issues with 
Secretary Abraham directly. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶8.  (C)  Comment:  Dr. Bahran obviously enjoyed his meeting 
with U/S Bolton, and asked the U/S when he was meeting with 
the President.  At that point, no meeting had been requested 
or  scheduled.  Two hours later, President Saleh's office 
called to request an immediate meeting at the Presidential 
Palace (septel).  It appears likely that Bahran was directly 
responsible, reflecting the close relations between President 
Saleh and his science advisors. 
 
MISENHEIMER