This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002142 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/25/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ NL
SUBJECT: IRAQ: DUTCH SUPPORT TRANSITION - ENCOURAGING 
OTHERS TO DO SO 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 238110 
 
     ¶B. WITMER-HOLLIDAY EMAIL 8/22 
     ¶C. THE HAGUE 2063 
     ¶D. THE HAGUE 01893 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Mary E. Daly Reaons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  The GoNL continues to support the 
transition phase in Iraq politically, militarily and 
financially.  The Dutch are also working behind the scenes 
within the EU to encourage other member states to more 
actively contribute to this effort.  Nevertheless, the Dutch 
do not want to be viewed as part of the Coalition Provisional 
Authority (CPA) in order to maintain domestic support for 
Dutch contributions.  In response to recent attacks in 
Baghdad, the Dutch Embassy has reduced staffing.  End 
Summary. 
 
Summary of Dutch Contributions 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) PolOff and EconOff conveyed reftel to Adri van 
Loopik, head of the MFA's Gulf States division.  The GoNL is 
supporting the transition in Iraq in numerous ways.  In 
addition to the approximately 1,100 troops dispatched in the 
southern Al Muthanna region of Iraq, the GoNL has given 
approximately EURO 21 million for humanitarian assistance 
(ref D).  The Ministry of Economic Affairs has allocated EUR 
3 million in funding (reconstruction aid) to promote Dutch 
business in Iraq.  The MFA recently announced it would give 
EUR 300,000 to aid in the de-mining of Iraq. and is looking 
to support the mass graves project (ref C) with personnel and 
funding.  The Dutch will not allocate any bilateral funding 
to Iraq at the October donor's meeting, preferring to support 
any additional traditional aid/reconstruction assistance via 
the European Union. 
 
 
Political Support for Transition Phase 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Van Loopik noted that the Dutch government supports 
the establishment of the Governing Council (GC), and the 
Dutch Embassy in Baghdad meets regularly with members of the 
GC.  (Note:  The Dutch Embassy had contact with numerous of 
the GC prior to its establishment.  End Note.)   Behind the 
scenes, the Dutch are actively encouraging other EU members 
to support the transition phase.  However, van Loopik noted 
that support would be more easily obtained following the 
passage of an additional UNSC resolution.  A new resolution 
could give countries, EU and otherwise, the political cover 
needed to more actively support the transition phase. 
 
¶4.  (C) Domestically, it is important to the GoNL to be 
viewed as supporting the stabilization force and the 
humanitarian/reconstruction effort, but not/not to be part of 
the "occupying power"/CPA itself.  Therefore, the GoNL has 
decided not/not to provide any civil servants, nor pay for 
the participation of any private citizens, to work within the 
CPA.  However, van Loopik commented that the GoNL does not 
oppose the participation of private Dutch citizens in the CPA 
if funded from non-GoNL sources. 
 
 
Drawdown of Dutch Embassy in Baghdad 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Following the attacks on both the Jordanian Embassy 
and the UNHQ, the GoNL reduced staffing at its Embassy in 
Baghdad.  Three staff remain:  the Charge, Administrative 
Counselor, and Defense Attache.  Two staff members (including 
the Queen's nephew, an MFA diplomat) were recalled.  Two 
others, a deputy defense attache and half-time consular 
officer, were prevented from assuming their posts.  An MFA 
security team will likely return the week of August 25 to 
reassess security around the chancery/residence.  (Note:  The 
residence, where all staff are currently residing, is 
directly above the Embassy.) 
SOBEL