This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002672 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/21/2013 
TAGS: PARM PREL MNUC AORC KNNP NL UNGA CDG UNDC
SUBJECT: DUTCH MFA ON 58TH UNGA FIRST COMMITTEE FOLLOW-UP 
DEMARCHE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 295420 
 
Classified By: Acting Political Counselor Nathaniel Dean for reasons 1. 
5 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: PolOff delievered reftel demarche on the 58th 
UNGA First Committee to Peter Potman, MFA Deputy Head of 
Nuclear Affairs and Non-Proliferation Division on October 20. 
 Potman said the draft resolution and accompanying U.S. 
points were extensively discussed last week in New York, and 
there is little difference between the U.S. and Dutch 
positions.  However, he said many EU countries see problems 
with the first preambulatory paragraph of the draft 
resolution, which specifically ties the exercise to September 
11, and therefore ignores the presence of non-U.S. national 
security issues in existence prior to September 11. 
According to Potman, the Dutch were also concerned with what 
he described as a letter from the U.S. Mission to the UN 
purportedly suggesting the U.S. would have little use for the 
First Committee if it did not improve.  Potman cited the 
necessity for the UN to act as a forum for different ideas to 
be considered regardless of agreement.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) PolOff delievered reftel demarche on the 58th UNGA 
First Committee to Peter Potman, MFA Deputy Head of Nuclear 
Affairs and Non-Proliferation Division on October 20.  Potman 
said the draft resolution and accompanying U.S. points were 
extensively discussed last week in New York, and there is 
little difference between the U.S. and Dutch positions. He 
hopes to get a read-out from the Dutch delegation by the end 
of this week on the New York meetings, but reiterated Dutch 
share U.S. concerns about the First Committee and support 
efforts to reinvigorate it.  Personally, Potman said he found 
Point C of the U.S. paper circulated in the First Committee 
to be interesting, but also foresees political problems with 
this regional approach.  He thinks the gist of the resolution 
is "fully acceptable," and there will be large support from 
the EU.  Potman cautioned however that he is unaware if the 
support will result in a consensus, as he has yet to confer 
with the Dutch delegation in New York. 
 
¶3. (C) Potman said many EU countries have problems with the 
first preambulatory paragraph of the draft resolution, which 
specifically ties the exercise to September 11.  Many EU 
members see it as a broader issue concerning security issues, 
which existed prior to Septemebr 11, and therefore do not 
feel the language of the first preambualtory paragraph is 
"appropriate."  He again stated that determination of support 
for the resolution is decided in New York, but "anything that 
will increase the effectiveness of the First Committee will 
have the Netherlands' blessing."  Potman raised an issue not 
directly in the U.S. paper, but of concern to the Dutch. 
According to Potman, the Dutch were also concerned with what 
he described as a letter from the U.S. Mission to the UN 
purportedly suggesting the U.S. would have little use for the 
First Committee if it did not improve.  Potman said the UNGA 
and its First Committee is the "marketplace for ideas." While 
we may not always agree, and the price paid is sometimes a 
lengthier path to solution, the Dutch believe the UN is 
precisely where divergent views should be taken into 
consideration. 
 
SOBEL