This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
TERREP 
 
DS FOR DS/DSS/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/08/2013 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: WALK-IN REPORTS POSSIBLE THREAT INFORMATION 
 
Classified By: RSO Alex Moore - Reason: 1.5(C) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary - On Oct 8 at approximately 1305 hours, RSO 
Colombo interviewed a walk-in of unknown reliability who 
reportedly overheard a conversation between two Sri Lankan 
Muslims on the street in which the words "eleven or 
eleventh," "eleven o'clock," "attack first," "blast," and 
"U.S. Embassy" were used.  Source also apparently saw one of 
the Muslims drop a photograph of a building he believed was 
the U.S. Embassy.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C/NF)  On Oct 8, at approximately 1305 hours, RSO 
Colombo, with the assistance of FSNI as translator, 
interviewed an unknown walk-in source of unknown reliability. 
 Source produced Sri Lankan National Identity card 
#710893616V identifying himself as Epitawatte Gedara 
Somaweera Chandrasiri, DPOB 03/29/1971 - Opalla, Sri Lanka, 
Address School Lane, Opalla, Galagedara, Kandy.  Source 
reported that while waiting for a bus on the Kandy/Peradeniya 
Road on Sept 29, he observed a Sri Lankan Muslim male drive 
past him in a white sedan and signal a second Muslim male 
standing beside the road.  The men greeted each other with a 
common Arabic greeting (Salim?) and proceeded to converse in 
English before eventually slipping into the Tamil language. 
Standing about ten feet from the men, the Source reported 
hearing bits and pieces of the conversation, but stated he 
did hear the words "eleven or eleventh," "eleven o'clock," 
"attack first," "blast or "blasting," and "U.S. Embassy." 
During this conversation, the driver of the vehicle attempted 
to pass some photographs to the second man but dropped them 
in the street.  One of the photographs flipped over and the 
Source saw what he believed was a picture of the American 
Embassy with the American flag.  Also in the photo was an 
unspecified red sedan that may or may not have been parked in 
front of the Embassy.  At that point, the Source reported the 
men noticed him and when one of them reached under his 
clothing for an unidentified object, the Source became 
fearful and quickly departed the area.  In his haste the 
Source apparently left behind some of his business materials 
which included the address of his business.  Source was 
concerned that the two men may have possession of his 
business address.  Source reportedly filed a police report on 
Oct 2 in the town of Kandy.  No further information is 
available at this time, but RSO will continue to investigate. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  RSO Action:  Source did not reveal any obvious 
indicators of deception during the interview.  The driver of 
the white sedan apparently used a small red triangle to 
signal the second man before the conversation was begun.  The 
relevance of this triangle is unclear, but such details give 
some authenticity to the Source's story.  As a result, MSGs 
and LGF have been placed on elevated alert until a more 
thorough investigation into the information provided can be 
conducted.  A police check will be conducted for the alleged 
police report filed by Source. 
ENTWISTLE