This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LAGOS 002574 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/17/2013 
TAGS: EPET EINV ELAB PGOV NI
SUBJECT: PRICE CAPS AND STRIKES CAUSE NIGERIA'S DOWNSTREAM 
DEREGULATION PLAN TO SPUTTER 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 1700 
     ¶B. LAGOS 2287 
     ¶C. LAGOS 2422 
     ¶D. LAGOS 2069 
     ¶E. LAGOS 2147 
     ¶F. LAGOS 2330 
     ¶G. LAGOS 2363 
     ¶H. LAGOS 2387 
 
Classified By: J GREGOIRE FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: Barely 60 days after President Obasanjo 
declared Nigeria's downstream petroleum sector officially and 
completely deregulated, and 30 days after he replaced the 
head of the powerful national petroleum corporation, a GON 
regulatory agency shut down fuel stations of a US-based 
company and announced regional price caps on gasoline sales. 
A second pricing advisory authority more in line with the 
President's views is cautiously attempting to nullify the 
price caps, but marketers are wary of making any moves that 
will bring the wrath of regulators upon their gas stations. 
As organized labor threatens another mass action, this time 
over his privatization policies, the President is walking a 
fine line between placating unions and activists who seek 
relevance in a dissatisfied but largely unmotivated society, 
and his method of enacting government reform by executive 
fiat.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------- 
You Call this Deregulation? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) A deregulated downstream petroleum sector had been 
chugging along since President Obasanjo suddenly did away 
with price-caps and other vestiges of government control on 
October 1 (ref A), shuffled his top petroleum advisors in 
early November, and replaced the head of the Nigerian 
National Petroleum Corporation with someone seen as 
supportive of his deregulation policies (ref B).  However, 
efforts by the Department of Petroleum Resources (DPR) to 
re-impose price caps on the sale of gasoline have undercut 
the President's tough rhetoric, and have forced fuel 
marketers to second-guess the environment in which they 
believed they were doing business. 
 
¶3. (C) On December 8, the DPR announced publicly that it was 
imposing new price caps on gasoline sales in Nigeria. 
According to the DPR, Lagos retail prices are not to exceed 
41 naira per liter (Lagos market prices had been hovering 
between 39.90 and 42 naira per liter), Abuja prices are 
capped at 42.50 naira, and a ceiling range of 45 to 48 naira 
per liter is set for Nigeria's northern region. (As we have 
seen since deregulation began, attention is being paid only 
to the price of gasoline; other fuels, such as diesel and 
kerosene, which are important industrial and consumer 
products throughout Nigeria, are not affected (ref C).) 
DPR's latest action followed a series of advertisements taken 
out in Nigerian daily newspapers announcing price caps by 
state.  Meanwhile, according to John Pototsky, Managing 
Director of Mobil Producing Nigeria, the DPR closed some of 
the company's fuel stations and arrested the managers for 
charging what the agency felt were too high prices.  Mobil 
stations were closed for two weeks in the large, commercially 
busy city of Ibadan, north of Lagos.  The stations are now 
open, and Mobil is keeping its prices within the bounds set 
by DPR. 
 
¶4.  (C) Mobil's Pototsky told Econoff on December 13 that the 
council established by the President last summer to help 
usher in his deregulation scheme, the Petroleum Products 
Pricing Regulatory Authority (PPPRA), met with marketers 
several times in recent weeks and has assured them that, DPR 
actions and announcements notwithstanding, the downstream 
sector remains deregulated and retailers should feel free to 
charge market prices for their fuel products.  Pototsky added 
that now that he has his stations open again, he is not going 
to be the first to cross the line in the sand drawn by DPR. 
Should other marketers follow Pototsky's lead, de facto price 
caps will remain in effect across Nigeria, regardless of the 
PPPRA's assurances that the caps have been lifted, because 
marketers fear DPR more than they trust PPPRA. (This is not 
the first time Mobil has been targeted by deregulation foes; 
during the run-up to a nationwide strike in October (ref D), 
Mobil stations were specifically targeted for pickets and 
threats of violence by labor unions and enforcers sent to 
counter price increases (ref E).) 
 
------------------------------- 
Obasanjo Throwing Labor a Bone? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) When asked where he thought the new Group Managing 
Director of NNPC, Funso Kupolokun, stood on the matter, 
Pototsky said Kupolokun will say and do whatever the 
President needs at any given moment.  Pototsky said the 
President is probably trying to throw some sort of bone to 
the unions by allowing the DPR to publicly state it is 
imposing price caps, while having PPPRA attempt to quietly 
soothe fuel marketers' jitters by claiming the sector remains 
deregulated. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Unions and other civil society organizations have 
tried to use fuel price increases as a means to mobilize 
Nigerians to stand up against what they feel is a presidency 
acting unilaterally and undemocratically (refs F, G).  The 
activists lost steam after an aborted nationwide strike in 
October, but have been again calling for mass action 
beginning January 1, this time over disagreement with the way 
the President has handled the move to privatize the nation's 
chronically flagging oil refineries (ref H).  The petroleum 
industry unions have stated they have no objection to 
refinery privatization in principle, but believe the 
government is rushing the process, and the unions want proof 
that legitimate buyers with technical expertise will assume 
control of the refineries. 
 
¶7. (C) In what may be another attempt to assuage unions 
enough to keep them from striking on January 1, the President 
may meet with union leaders on December 17 to discuss the 
status of the privatization plan. Also, the Director General 
of the Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE), the agency 
overseeing GON parastatal privatization, was recently quoted 
as saying only institutional investors, rather than 
individuals, will be allowed to purchase controlling shares 
of public enterprises, and that no refineries will be sold 
yet this year (contrary to the GON's previous goal of selling 
at least one of the four by the end of 2003).  Mobil's 
Pototsky told Econoff he doubts the unions will actually 
begin a strike on New Year's Day, in part because so many 
Nigerians and expatriates living in Nigeria will be away from 
home for the holidays, which will reduce the number of 
available workers who might support a strike, and thus limit 
a strike's impact.  Pototsky surmised that if the unions 
manage to gain enough momentum to pull off a mass action, it 
will be during the second or third week of January at the 
earliest. 
 
¶8. (C) COMMENT: The DPR's moves to impose price caps, labor 
unions' calls for a strike in opposition to the GON's 
refinery privatization plan, nd fuel supply chain problems 
(septel), all pose challenges to the President's deregulation 
plan.  If Obasanjo is allowing DPR to play on the sympathies 
of unions and civil society activists in hopes of buying him 
breathing room, his Administration will likely have to 
release at least some details of the letters of interest from 
potential partners wishing to buy control of the nation's 
refineries (due November 14).  But, if the GON ultimately 
appears to be placating traditional cronies through the 
refineries' sales (ref H), the President may eventually find 
little wiggle room left in the face of mass action. 
Regardless of the likelihood of a strike, as Jules Harvey, 
Managing Director of Texaco, recently said at a business 
luncheon, "This is only the beginning of a very long and 
complicated process of deregulation." END COMMENT. 
HINSON-JONES