This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RANGOON 000549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS BM
SUBJECT: 60TH ANNIVERSARY OF "SIAM-BURMA DEATH RAILWAY" 
COMMEMORATED 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  COM, DATT, and others participated in a 
May 1 Australia-organized ceremony commemorating the 60th 
anniversary of the infamous Siam-Burma Death Railway.  133 
Americas were among the estimated 12,000 Allied POWs who 
perishing while slaving on the railway's construction.  This 
was the first time the GOB has permitted the C-12 out of 
Bangkok to fly from Rangoon to Moulmein (Mawlamyine).  The 
usual high-profile presence of Military Intelligence minders 
was largely absent during this trip and the GOB did not 
attempt to place a "safety officer" on board the C-12. 
Perhaps the GOB's lighter touch on this trip was an 
outgrowth of the successful, confidence-building WWII 
remains recovery mission concluded last month.   END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) Four surviving Australian POWs were among the 60 or 
so mostly Australian civilians who traveled to Thanbyuzarat, 
the Burma terminus of the railway constructed with forced 
POW and "native" labor in WWII.  The COM joined the 
Australian and British ambassadors for a short service at 
the cemetery, at which former POW Dr. Rowley Richards was 
the keynote speaker.  The surviving POWs were the event's 
center of focus and willingly shared their memories and 
experiences.  Dr. Richards recounted that, while en route to 
a POW camp in Japan after the completion of the railway, his 
ship was torpedoed by a U.S. submarine.  He was fished out 
of the ocean by a lifeboat and arrived in Japan just prior 
to the nuclear attacks.  As a prison doctor he undoubtedly 
saved many American lives, commenting, "On my rounds I used 
to linger longer than I should have with the Americans, as I 
was fascinated by the accents of your chaps from the Bronx." 
 
¶3.  (SBU) This was the first time the GOB has permitted the 
C-12 out of Bangkok to fly from Rangoon to Moulmein 
(Mawlamyine).  Flying on the C-12 saved the Embassy group a 
15-hour round-trip drive over dangerous roads.  Situated 100 
miles and a 35-minute flight southeast of Rangoon, Moulmein 
is Burma's fourth largest city and a former capital of 
British Lower Burma.  Airport formalities were non-existent 
in Moulmein and apart from a slightly delayed takeoff 
(caused by a dog napping on the tarmac), the flights were 
without incident.  The blacktop road running 40 miles south 
from Moulmein to Thanbyuzarat winds through miles of rubber 
plantations; although in past years the area has been 
plagued by insurgency, the road featured only one security 
checkpoint.  Embassy Rangoon extends its thanks to Embassy 
Bangkok, particularly to the DAO and C-12 crew, for the 
generous use of the aircraft. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) COMMENT:  We noted that the normal high-profile 
presence of Military Intelligence minders was largely absent 
during this trip.  Further, the GOB did not attempt to place 
a "safety officer" on board the C-12 this time.  This was 
also the first year the GOB permitted the Australian embassy 
to host a formal ceremony at Thanbyuzarat.  Perhaps the 
GOB's lighter touch on this trip was an outgrowth of the 
successful, confidence-building WWII remains recovery 
mission concluded last month.  End Comment. MARTINEZ