This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 COLOMBO 002196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT, SA/PD, INR/NESA; 
NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
PLEASE ALSO PASS TOPEC 
 
E.O. 12958:       DECL:  12-30-13 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PINS PHUM KPAO CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Taking advantage of cohabitation crisis, 
Tamil Tigers launch public relations effort 
 
Refs:  Colombo 2191, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead. 
Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  The Tamil Tigers have launched a 
public relations effort meant to burnish their image in 
comparison with the ongoing cohabitation imbroglio in 
Colombo.  The effort has included repeated (and 
accurate) pronouncements that the Tigers are ready to 
recommence talks, but cannot do so due to the situation 
in the south.  The Tigers have also trumpeted their 
support for practical steps to further the peace 
process.  Even while the Tigers quietly continue to 
increase their influence in the north/east and bully 
percieved opponents, their public relations effort has 
been very effective in making the group appear 
statesmanlike and the model of restraint.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Tigers Underscore Support for Talks 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) In the past several weeks, the Liberation Tigers 
of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) organization has launched a public 
relations effort meant to burnish its image in 
comparison with the ongoing cohabitation imbroglio in 
Colombo.  The LTTE effort has included repeated (and 
accurate) pronouncements that the group is ready to 
recommence talks, but cannot do so due to the confused 
situation in the south.  The pro-LTTE web-site 
"TamilNet," for example, reported on December 20 that 
S.P. Thamilchelvam, the group's Political Wing Chief, 
had reiterated the group's interest in talks, stating: 
"We are ready to negotiate with anyone who comes to 
power in Sri Lanka as long as he or she is a person 
ready to work towards an agreement on the political 
aspirations and expectations of the people..."   The 
Tigers reportedly made similar points during a meeting 
with Tamil National Alliance (TNA) parliamentarians in 
early December.  In a recent meeting with Japanese 
diplomats in the LTTE-controlled Vanni region, Tiger 
representatives underlined the same message. 
 
¶3.  (C) (Note:  The Tiger public relations effort also 
included a recent effort to reach out to India, a 
longstanding international opponent of the group.  In an 
early December speech, Anton Balasingham, the LTTE's 
London-based spokesman, urged India "to adopt a new 
creative approach and initiate friendly relations with 
our organization."  End Note.) 
 
----------------------------------- 
Willingness to take Practical Steps 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) While underscoring their interest in talks, 
the Tigers have also trumpeted their support for 
practical steps to further the peace process, including: 
 
-- During the recent Christmas period, the Tigers kept 
entry points into the Vanni region open for extended 
hours "for the convenience of the people during the 
festive season," as TamilNet put it.  (This LTTE move 
contrasted significantly with the situation in Colombo 
where the funeral ceremony for an extremist Buddhist 
monk on Christmas Eve sparked concerns that Christians 
might be targeted for attack -- see Reftels.)  The 
Tigers also promised to keep entry points open for 
longer hours during the New Year's period. 
 
-- After years of closure (due to LTTE attacks), the 
Tigers also cooperated in the late December reconnection 
of Batticaloa town in the east with Sri Lanka's railroad 
system. 
 
-- The LTTE also recently announced that it planned to 
exempt numerous items, such as books, animal feed, 
candles, boats, etc., from "taxation" beginning January 
1, 2004.  "Taxation" rates on numerous other items would 
also be reduced beginning on the same date. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Group Quietly Continues Old Ways 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Even as the Tigers try to appear as moderate as 
possible, the group is not remaining static in terms of 
its aggressive on-the-ground behavior.  As it has since 
the peace process commenced in December 2001, the LTTE 
quietly continues to increase its influence in the 
north/east, and bully any and all perceived opponents. 
In the north/east, for example, the group continues to 
avidly recruit Tamils for its military and civilian 
apparatuses.  As reported in Reftels, this effort quite 
clearly involves a large dose of forcible recruitment of 
children.  In Jaffna District, the group also regularly 
instigates marches and other activities meant to 
browbeat and marginalize the Sri Lankan military.  It is 
also extending its network of Jaffna "political" 
offices. 
 
¶6.  (C) In the meantime, in the ethnically-mixed Eastern 
Province, the Tigers continue to pressure the Muslim 
community via petty harassment and "taxation."  (It is 
not clear what impact, if any, the announcement 
mentioned above regarding "taxation" may have on the 
LTTE's routine pattern of extorting funds from Muslims.) 
The LTTE has also shown itself more than willing to use 
violence against Muslims (eight Muslims were killed in 
what appears to have been LTTE-instigated violence in 
Trincomalee District in late November/early December, 
for example).  At the same time, although its use of 
targeted assassinations of perceived opponents is down 
from the very high levels reached earlier this year, the 
Tigers are clearly still in the business of threatening 
perceived Tamil opponents.  As reported in Reftels, for 
example, the group clearly wants to clip the wings of 
senior Tamil MP V. Anandasangaree and there are credible 
reports that the group might try to kill him if the 
opportunity presented itself. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C) Since the cohabitation crisis erupted in Colombo 
in early November, almost everyone agrees that the LTTE 
has handled the situation in a very astute manner. 
Despite the fact that President Kumaratunga -- their 
longtime foe -- has taken the initiative in the south, 
the Tigers have generally kept their cool and tried to 
appear moderate.  (The one major exception to this trend 
was LTTE leader V. Prabhakaran's so-called "heroes' day" 
address in late November which contained some very 
provocative language about the south.)  In doing so, 
they have done their level best not to provide a foil 
that would serve to strengthen anti-peace process 
elements in the south.  At the same time, the group 
looks increasingly statesmanlike in the eyes of some 
international and local observers -- there is no doubt, 
for example, that a common perception is that the group 
would like to recommence talks with the GSL and is being 
prevented from doing do by the cohabitation impasse. 
 
¶8.  (C) Overall, the LTTE's recent pattern of behavior 
may well indicate some maturing of the organization. 
That said, as demonstrated by its continued efforts to 
increase its influence in the north/east and employment 
of strongarm tactics, the group has clearly not changed 
its stripes to a marked extent.  Thanks to the confusion 
in the south and its own public relations effort, 
however, the LTTE has managed to improve its image of 
late, which is perhaps more a commentary on the sad 
state of Colombo politics than the LTTE itself.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
¶9.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD