This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 001914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, MAY 7: DEMOCRACY IN IRAQ; 
ARAB LEAGUE; ARAB MEDIA 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: A strong call for the end of the Arab League 
appears on the commentary pages, citing the League's 
repeated failures to solve Arab problems or maintain Arab 
unity, most prominently during the Iraq crisis. Arab 
satellite news channels are attacked for the negative tone 
of their coverage of Iraq even after liberation, with one 
writer stating, "Iraqis do not need others to sow sedition 
among them." Another writer warns that a democratic Iraq 
will lead some neighboring states to attempt to undermine 
any new Iraqi government. A conservative commentator 
portrays the presence of US troops in Iraq as a reflection 
of an "American-Zionist ideology" of "occupation." END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: Al-Qabas reports on its front page that 
"a responsible Kuwaiti parliamentary source" says that the 
U.S. has requested Kuwait drop its claims for reparations 
from Iraq dating from the 1990-91 Gulf War. 
 
Interior Minister Sheikh Mohammed Al-Khaled announced that a 
Kuwaiti team left for Iraq on May 6 to search for Kuwaiti 
POWs, Al-Qabas reports on its May 7 front page. 
 
Al-Qabas reports that Minister of Social Affairs and Labor 
Al-Ayyar announced that a fund-raising campaign for Iraq 
would be launched in the near future. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "The Occupation" 
Islamist MP Abdelmohsen Jamal wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(5/05):  "It seems that Sharon was successful in convincing 
the US that the Arabs can only be dominated if their lands 
are occupied one after another. Occupation has become an 
American-Zionist ideology. and threatens every country that 
does not comply with the American-Zionist demands." 
 
¶4.  "Iraq and the Neighboring Countries" 
MP Saleh Ashour wrote in independent Al-Watan (5/05): 
"There are many indications that the new Iraq will be a 
democratic country where freedom of expression and pluralism 
will be practiced. This new model of Iraq will undoubtedly 
disturb the countries neighboring Iraq. Therefore, those 
countries will attempt to sabotage this regime." 
 
¶5.  "A New Reading" 
Dr. Yasser Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-A'am 
(5/06):  "During his visit to Baghdad, the prophet of 
democracy to our region, Donald Rumsfeld, asked Iraqis who 
admire the Islamic regime in Iran to leave Iraq and go to 
Iran. We don't know if he also advised the Iraqis who admire 
the American system to leave for the US, but we are certain 
that the attempt to deport Iraqi oppositionists will not be 
accepted by the Iraqi people. It seems that the arrogance of 
the Americans is based on emotion not rationality." 
 
¶6.  "The Arab League and Its Continued Failure" 
Mohammad Al-Saddiqi wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(5/06):  "It seems that the Arab League is facing a 
financial problem because Kuwait and the UAE have abstained 
from paying their share in the Arab League. In confronting 
this political and financial dilemma, we should seriously 
think of the existence and the need for the Arab League in 
solving the Arab countries problems. The Arab League has 
proven that it is incapable of achieving Arab unity, leading 
us to think seriously about closing this entity and looking 
for other means." 
 
¶7.  "You are Not the Guardians of the Iraqi People" 
Laila Al-Othman wrote in independent Al-Qabas (5/07):  "Why 
do Arab satellite television channels continue agitation 
against the freedom of Iraqis? Why do they hate to see the 
Iraqis enjoying the taste of freedom? . Arab satellite 
channels must realize that the years of oppression against 
the Iraqis have taught them ways to defend their existence 
and to defend their country. Iraqis do not need others to 
sow sedition among them. Leave the Iraqi people alone, and 
do not [attempt to] be their guardians. Very soon you will 
witness a new Iraq." 
 
JONES