This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ROME 004974 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/31/2013 
TAGS: PREL IZ IT IRAQI FREEDOM
SUBJECT: IRAQ: ITALY REQUESTS SENIOR POSITION IN CPA 
 
REF: A. ROME 4904 
     ¶B. ROME 4957 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR MEL SEMBLER FOR REASONS 1.5(b),(d). 
 
¶1. (U) This is an urgent action request.  Please see 
paragraph 3. 
 
¶2. (C) Post has received a letter and "Aide Memoire" dated 28 
October from Foreign Minister Frattini to the Ambassador 
outlining Italy's contributions to Iraqi reconstruction 
efforts and requesting that, in return, a senior Italian 
envoy be appointed as a Deputy to Administrator Paul Bremer, 
"having responsibility for a major area of activity, 
alongside other envoys of similar rank from the US, the UK 
and other partners in the coalition."  (See text of letter 
and Aide Memoire paragraphs 4-5). 
 
¶3. (C) Post strongly believes that Italy's request merits 
serious consideration.  Italy has been one of our most 
reliable and steadfast allies in Iraq.  Except for the US and 
UK, no other ally has provided such a strong combination of 
military and economic support to promote Iraqi stabilization 
and reconstruction efforts.  The number of Italian technical 
experts working on the ground with the CPA and Iraqi 
provisional government will soon number approximately 40. 
Italy proudly claims to have the third largest military and 
civilian presence in Iraq.  (Comment: from here we cannot 
confirm whether the Italian presence is just larger or just 
smaller than the Polish.  End comment).  Italy also made one 
of the largest EU contributions at the 23-24 October Madrid 
Donors Conference: Euro 200 million over the next three years 
on top of troop deployments, humanitarian assistance, and 
health, water, and agriculture aid programs.  (Ref B contains 
further detail on the Italian commitment to Iraq 
reconstruction.)  Assuming that the government would provide 
one of its most competent officials, Italy's significant 
commitment in Iraq would be reinforced by appointment to a 
senior level position within the CPA. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Text of the letter follows (Informal Embassy 
Translation): 
 
Dear Mel, 
 
As you well know, Italy is the third largest contributor to 
the CPA in Iraq, 
and as such we expect equitable political and economic 
returns. 
 
In this regard, I thought it would be useful to send you a 
short memo that 
identifies our priorities in terms of the sectors in which we 
believe Italian 
participation can be the most significant and competitive. 
 
I trust in your assistance in communicating our expectations 
to your 
authorities. 
 
Please let me take this occasion to send you my best wishes. 
Until soon, 
Franco Frattini. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Text of the attached "Aide Memoire" follows: 
 
Italy is the third largest contributor to CPA, having placed 
at its disposal over three thousand troops and a growing 
number of civilian experts, both in Baghdad, Basra and the 
Dhi-Qar province.  In addition to this, Italy has agreed - 
among others - to fund the drafting of a new Transport Master 
plan for Iraq, the restoration - in cooperation with the 
Iraqi Foundation - of the marshlands in the Southern region, 
a wide-ranging program for the rehabilitation of hospital 
structures in Baghdad and the Basra region.  The level of 
this commitment is constantly growing, as the number of 
experts active in CPA increases and new cooperation projects 
come on stream, and should be appropriately reflected in the 
command structure of CPA itself.  We feel, therefore, that it 
would be appropriate for a senior Italian envoy to be 
appointed as Deputy to the Administrator, L. Paul Bremer, 
having responsibility for a major area of activity, alongside 
other envoys of similar rank from the US, the UK and other 
partners in the coalition. 
 
The reconstruction of Iraq will call for a major effort on 
the part of the international community, on the basis of 
existing and available capabilities.  In this context, Italy 
is particularly interested in the following: 
 
--  The rehabilitation of the telephone and 
telecommunications system will require considerable new 
 
investments to replace outdated or damaged equipment. 
Telecom Italia has submitted a detailed proposal for linking 
the Iraqi fixed telephone system to the international grid 
via Jordan and Israel, using the "Med-Nautilus" network. 
This link would supplement the one already envisaged via 
Kuwait, and provide the necessary flexibility for a viable 
system of international telecommunications. 
 
--  The monetisation of the Iraqi "food basket", by means of 
debit cards to be issued to every adult citizen, has been 
announced and should become effective by next summer.  It 
will call for sophisticated IT and communications technology, 
for which a number of Italian companies have considerable 
expertise, possess leading-edge technology and could provide 
assistance. 
 
--  The Iraqi Transport Master Plan, will concentrate on 
essential priorities for the entire transportation grid of 
the country.  Italy can provide assistance, notably in 
respect of urban railways/metro links, intermodal transport 
infrastructure, air traffic control systems for civilian 
airports (where Marconi Italia and Raytheon have established 
a good working relationship). 
 
--  Water and irrigation present major shortcomings which 
should be urgently addressed, in order to provide the 
necessary basis for stability and sustainable development 
both in Baghdad and in the Southern Region.  Italy has 
developed a considerable expertise and could participate in 
the programs being currently finalized in the fields of water 
sanitation, irrigation and especially the reclaiming of the 
marshlands in the Southern region, the 
restoration of the canals system, etc. 
 
--  Electric power generation is another crucial priority. 
Ansaldo Energia - and the Finmeccanica Group - have a 
considerable experience for the Iraqi market, and have over 
the last thirty years supplied a wide range of power 
generating units as well as turn-key installations.  They 
could assist in the updating and renovation of the power 
generation systems of the country, to take account of the 
needs of the new Iraq. 
 
End Text. 
 
Minimize considered. 
SEMBLER 
 
 
NNNN 
	2003ROME04974 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL