This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 001167 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV BM ASSK
SUBJECT: ASSK UNDERGOES "MAJOR" SURGERY 
 
REF: RANGOON 1160 (NOTAL) 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (SBU)  On September 19, Aung San Suu Kyi's surgeon told 
several diplomats and assembled reporters that ASSK had 
undergone a "major" three hour surgery from noon to 3:00 p.m. 
 The surgeon, Dr. Tin Myo Win, who is also ASSK's personal 
physician, declined to discuss the reason for the operation, 
but said the surgical team had consisted of himself, two 
anesthesiologists, and one gynecologist.  Dr. Tin Myo Win 
reported that the surgery was "100 percent successful" and 
that no blood transfusion was required.  ASSK remains 
hospitalized, and under military guard, at the Asia Royal 
Cardiac Hospital in downtown Rangoon where the operation took 
place. 
 
¶2. (C) According to Embassy sources, ASSK was admitted to the 
hospital late on September 17 (reftel) and surgery was 
originally scheduled for September 18, but was then postponed 
for one day.  We made several visits to the hospital on 
September 19 and requested an opportunity to see ASSK and 
deliver flowers.  Hospital authorities initially denied ASSK 
was a patient, but eventually acknowledged her presence and 
accepted the flowers, but refused to allow a personal visit. 
Military intelligence officers have sealed off two floors at 
the hospital, including the top floor (9th) where ASSK is 
reportedly recuperating.  Several dozen NLD supporters were 
at the hospital today, quietly seeking information, but there 
was no other democratic opposition activity observed in 
Rangoon. 
 
¶3. (C) Comment: We understand that ASSK's doctor is under 
strict orders not to reveal specific information about her 
condition, or to comment on how long her stay at the hospital 
will last.  This surgery was clearly more than a "routine 
outpatient procedure," as we had heard yesterday.  Sources 
tell us the operation was for a gynecological procedure, and 
we are also aware that ASSK suffers from a serious stomach 
ulcer. 
Martinez