This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 TEGUCIGALPA 001144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR DS/IP/WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, S/CT, INR, EUR/WE 
DIA FOR CSR 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/15/2013 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR PREL CASC HO
SUBJECT: POPULAR REVOLUTIONARY FORCES ISSUE COMMINIQUE: 
THREATEN AMERICAN,UK AND SPANISH DIPLOMATS IN HONDURAS 
 
REF: TEGUCIGALPA 912 
 
Classified By: Regional Security Officer John B. McKennan, 
Reasons 1.5 C and D. 
 
 ¶1. (SBU)  SUMMARY:  On the evening of May 14 post received a 
communique from a group calling itself the "Popular 
Revolutionary Forces" announcing the beginning of a campaign 
to overthrow the Maduro government and vowing to evict 
"Yankees" and other foreign occupiers.  The communique's 
rhetoric follows traditional Latino revolutionary style.  It 
also identifies United States, United Kingdom and Spanish 
diplomats accredited to Honduras as legitimate military 
targets.  Based on information available at this time Post 
concurs with the initial Honduran police assessment (assuming 
the document is valid) that the communique represents an 
attempt to gain political support and is not a realistic 
threat.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (SBU)  On the evening of May 14 post received a communique 
from a group calling itself the "Popular Revolutionary 
Forces" FPR announcing the beginning of a campaign to 
overthrow the Maduro government and vowing to evict "Yankees" 
and other foreign occupiers from Iraq (and presumably 
Honduras).  The communique's rhetoric follows traditional 
Latino revolutionary style.  It also identifies United 
States, United Kingdom and Spanish diplomats accredited to 
Honduras as legitimate military targets.  RSO has checked 
with a number of sources and determined that FPR cells were 
created in El Salvador in the 1970s-1980s and clandestinely 
charged with agitating within unions and popular 
organizations. The FPR was supported by the Salvadorian 
guerrillas.  Four of the group's most powerful Honduran 
leaders were exiled and then circa 1991 allowed to return to 
Honduras. They subsequently violated an agreement not to 
continue revolutionary activities. Two of those exiled were, 
Gustavo Garcia Espana and Rigoberto Padilla Russell. 
Clementina Garcia Espana, (Gustavo's sister) was also a 
senior member, but not exiled.  Reftel, para 1 describes 
thirty organizations involved in political demonstrations and 
the eight groups that are the most anti-U.S. including the 
Democratic Union (UD). 
 
¶3. (S)  The FPR is believed to have been involved in the 
burning of the AID building in Tegucigalpa in 1988.  Last 
month there was an attempt by several anti-U.S. groups to 
commemorate the 15 year anniversary of the attack with a 
demonstration in front of the AID mission building.  While 
the demonstration did not take place,  RSO sources with 
access to activist planners, indicated that some leaders were 
attempting to bring back former Leftists responsible for the 
attack to help with training and to motivate current group 
members.  The FPR, or persons using that name, have been 
known to release communiques over the years since 1991 
against government policies and to call people to street 
protests.  It is not possible at this time, given the 
available information, to determine the "validity" of this 
document.  Additionally, the document was provided to the 
Embassy via  Honduran Military Intelligence (C-2).  RSO 
Comment:  The C-2 organization is a small group struggling 
with limited resources that has on occasion provided 
information from questionable sources for questionable 
reasons.  While the document was reportedly given to/obtained 
from a local newspaper, post was unable to find any mention 
of the communique in today's Press.  Normally, the local 
press does not hesitate to report this type of story.  End 
Comment. 
 
¶4.  (C)  RSO sources indicate that two leaders of the FPR (or 
the attempt to create a new FPR) are Carolos Umberto Paz and 
Carlos Umberto Amalya Amador (possible aka: Ramon Amalya 
Amador).  Both were active in the recent May Day 
demonstrations in Tegucigalpa, and were personally involved 
in tearing down a fence at the National Congress.  Both have 
been seen participating in demonstrations outside the Embassy 
and RSO staff has photographed Paz painting a revolutionary 
slogan on the street outside the Embassy during the last 
demonstration.  Paz also reportedly played a role in the 
burning of the AID building 15 years ago. 
 
¶5.  (C)  It appears that Carlos Umberto Paz and Carlos 
Umberto Amalya Amador are attempting to re-establish the FPR 
as part of a continuing effort by certain elements to 
de-stabilize the Maduro government. They are said to be 
looking for "sponsors" and feel they will be easier to obtain 
if they identify with their old name and organization. This 
communique may be an early attempt to garner support for a 
re-kindled FPR. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Paz, Amador, and several other members of the 
original FPR, aka: Fuerzas Populares Revolutionarias - 
Lorenzo Zelaya movement including Gustavo Garcia Espana, 
Rigoberto Padilla Russell and Clementina Garcia Espana are 
known to be active members of the party that became the 
Democratic Union Party (Unificacion Demoncratica) or UD 
represented in the National Congress. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Post has shared copies of the comminique with the UK 
and Spanish missions and been in contact with the police who 
are also assessing the information.  RSO and PolOff will meet 
tomorrow with representatives from the UK and Spanish 
diplomatic missions to brief them on the latest developments. 
 Based on information available, Post concurs with the 
initial Honduran police assessment (assuming the document is 
valid) that the communique represents an attempt to gain 
political support and is not a realistic threat at this time. 
 Post will continue to investigate and provide additional 
information as it becomes available.  Below is an informal 
translation of the communique. 
 
 
Popular Revolutionary Forces 
 
Communication 
 
We, the popular revolutionary Forces announce to the Honduran 
people the beginning of our political and military activities 
in an effort to eliminate the neo-liberal and pro-imperialist 
government of Ricardo Maduro that is imposed on the majority 
of our people. 
 
In the international arena, we condemn the military 
occupation of Iraq by the United States, along with the 
despicable governments of Great Britain and Spain. 
We demand the immediate retreat of the Yankees' occupation 
forces in Iraq and support the fight of the Arab people 
against the International Zionism. 
 
We, again, raise our trenches to fight politically and 
militarily against the enemies of our people, who deeply 
rooted in the government, distribute among themselves the 
country's wealth whilst forsaking thousands of fellow 
citizens. 
 
Our liberty rifles will be aimed from now on, to the heads of 
those white-collar thieves; and as revolutionaries we swear 
to not rest until we seize them and do justice in the name of 
our country. 
 
We have defined our military objectives as the following: 
fight political corruption amongst government employees; the 
bourgeoisie's businesses, buildings, companies, as well as 
their accomplices involved in such corruption.  For these 
people, we have a long list of their addresses and know of 
their movements. 
 
We have also defined as subjects of our military objectives 
all diplomats of the governments of the United States of 
America, Great Britain and Spain who are accredited in 
Honduras. We won't rest until we avenge the blood of our 
Iraqi brothers, who's peoples are today, victims of the 
aggression of those countries. 
 
We urge the patriotic officers of the police and the army to 
rebel against a tyrannical government.  Let your weapons 
point to the thieves and corrupt officials who have wronged 
this noble country. 
 
THE REVOLUTIONARY POPULAR FORCES call on this country's 
popular and rebellious organizations, to repossess the 
streets and overthrow this government that mangles the 
dignity of the poor and humble citizens. 
THE PEOPLE UNITED AND ARMED, SHALL NEVER BE DEFEATED OR 
DESTROYED. 
 
From an unknown location in Honduras: 
Political-military Commission of the 
POLITICAL REVOLUTIONARY FORCES 
 
May 2003 END OF TRANSLATION 
Palmer