This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091332Z Jul 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/09/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: PRESS BEGINS TO QUESTION TURKISH MILITARY 
ACTIVITIES IN IRAQ 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 4278 
     ¶B. ANKARA 4240 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reason:1.5(b)(d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Turkish press' sensationalist reaction to July 
4 U.S. arrest (and subsequent release) of Turkish special 
forces soldiers in Iraq shifted somewhat July 9.  Even 
mainstream secularist journalists have begun to  question what 
the Turkish military is or may have been doing in Iraq. 
Responding to harsh criticism of the AK Government for its 
supposed "submissive" stance toward the U.S. (ref A), F.M. Gul 
sounded a slightly tougher note; privately, AK officials 
assert to us that the incident is clarifying the need to rein 
in the TGS/military and bring it under civilian control. 
Establishment standard-bearer "Cumhuriyet," well-connected to 
senior military leadership, highlights what it calls a 
growing 
"crisis" between the relatively conciliatory AK and the TGS. 
Meanwhile, press conspiracy spinners continue to allege USG 
ties to the terrorist PKK/KADEK.  Papers also note that the 
"Armenian genocide" issue is likely to further aggravate U.S. 
-Turkey relations.  End summary. 
 
 
----------------- 
Gen. Jones' Visit 
----------------- 
 
 
¶2. (U) The press characterized the July 8 visit of SACEUR/ 
CINCUSEUR General Jones as an effort to "mollify" the Turks. 
The press also reported that the contentious issue of 
representation on the joint fact-finding commission (TGS 
rejected the U.S.'s initial candidate) had been resolved.  All 
papers report that the commission will begin its work in 
Ankara 
July 9.  The Ambassador's comments to the Anatolian Press 
Service reinforcing the U.S. commitment to a quick, fair, and 
transparent inquiry and describing the Jones visit as a 
positive 
step received wide and accurate coverage. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Establishment Press Suspicions About the Turkish Military 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
¶3. (U) Leading columnists are beginning to question the nature 
of Turkish Special Forces' (TSF) activities in Iraq and their 
role in the current situation.  "Hurriyet" editor-in-chief 
Ertugrul Ozkok, who had previously condemned the U.S. action 
in 
the strongest terms, today acknowledged that the Turks have 
some explaining to do.  Ozkok questioned why explosive 
material 
was discovered in the Special Forces office and why members 
of 
the unit generally wore civilian clothes.  The pro-West 
liberal 
Cuneyt Ulsever, another widely-followed "Hurriyet" columnist, 
raised similar questions and cast doubt on whether the AK 
Government was aware of what the TSF were doing.  Muharrem 
Sarikaya, center-left "Sabah" Ankara bureau chief and a 
staunch 
supporter of the military, also raised the alleged presence 
of 
explosives in the local TSF office, and asserted that the 
"mystery" behind the crisis will now be solved in Ankara. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Secularist establishment standard-bearer "Cumhuriyet" 
ran a front-page story on "the Gul crisis," noting the 
divergence of statements by TGS Chief General Ozkok, who, the 
paper points out, said he does not believe the action was a 
"local event" (ref B), and F.M. Gul, who has repeatedly 
asserted that Washington had no prior knowledge of the action. 
Center-left "Milliyet" achieved the same purpose of 
highlighting the different approaches of the TGS and AK 
Government by putting an angry threat of revenge from the 
military and the government's cool-handed approach on facing 
center-fold pages. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Most papers carried FM Gul's subsequent comments on the 
floor of Parliament, offered in respose to a query from the 
opposition pro-Establishment CHP, which asserted that AK 
Government had hurt "Turkish national honor."  Gul replied 
that 
"it is ridiculous to think that the Turkish Armed Forces are 
involved in terrorist activity."  He added that "it is the 
United States, not Turkey, that has lost" from this incident. 
Separately, papers quoted P.M. Erdogan as saying simply that 
the incident was "unfortunate." 
 
 
¶6. (C) In private meetings with us, AK officials continue to 
seek USG moral support and underscore the need to improve 
bilateral ties.  AK Diyarbakir M.P. Cavit Torun approached us 
July 9 asking what "we" -- AK and the USG -- "could do about 
the Turkish military."  Separately, AK M.P. Irfan Gunduz, a 
personal friend of Gul and like him a representative of 
Kayseri (Gul's geographic political base), asserted to us 
that, in fact, the Turkish military would suffer in the eyes 
of the public for what it had done in Iraq.  Moreover, Gunduz 
added, the latest incidents make it even more imperative that 
AK pursue its reform agenda and end the military's unchecked 
dominance over the Turkish State by bringing it under real 
civilian control. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
No U.S. Apology, Plenty of Conspiracy Theories 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
¶7. (U) Both "Hurriyet" and "Radikal" carried articles 
suggesting that the United States is neither backing off its 
claims that the operation was justified nor preparing to 
apologize.  "Hurriyet" cited U.S. officials in Washington who 
state that Turkey has not been a reliable NATO partner. 
Inaccurately, the paper asserts the officials claim that the 
Turks refused to grant emergency landing permission to a U.S. 
plane struck by enemy fire.  Islam-oriented "Yeni Safak" 
latched on to the conspiracy theory that the U.S. action was 
intended to protect the PKK from Turkish Special Forces and 
then use the PKK against the Iranian regime.  Conspiratorial 
thinking was also evident in reports of an assassination 
attempt yesterday against the Governor of the southeastern 
province of Tunceli.  "Hurriyet" noted on its front page that 
"while the U.S. claims that Turks plotted to kill a Kurdish 
governor, the PKK/KADEK carried out an attack against the 
governor of Tunceli."  "Cumhuriyet" juxtaposed the story of 
the failed assassination with a claim that the source of the 
current controversy in Iraq stems from the U.S. failure to 
deal effectively with the PKK threat. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
Detentions over, "Genocide" Coming... 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶8. (U) All papers reported that the current crisis is likely 
to deepen this week with the likely passage of an Armenian 
genocide resolution by the U.S. Senate.  As a headline in 
"Milliyet" put it, "Detentions are Over, but Genocide is 
Coming." 
PEARSON