This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281342Z Aug 03S E C R E T AMMAN 005491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
TREASURY FOR DAUFHAUSER/BFOX/BMURDEN/JZARATE/PASHIN 
NSC FOR JMYERS 
CPA FOR GEORGE WOLFE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2008 
TAGS: EFIN ETTC IZ JO
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN SUPPORT FOR THE IRAQI ASSET HUNT 
 
REF: SECSTATE 247694 
 
Classified By: David M. Hale, Charge d'Affaires, a.i. 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Expressing appreciation for Jordan's cooperation 
in tracking Iraqi assets, the Charge explained to Prime 
Minister Ali Abul Ragheb August 28 that the investigation had 
reached a stage where more specific information was needed 
about individual accounts, companies and methods.  He pressed 
the Prime Minister to authorize continued discrete 
cooperation between U.S. investigators and Jordanian 
officials in the areas identified in reftel. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Abul Ragheb said he would consult with his 
ministers on a response.  In general, however, he thought it 
was best to "let the past be the past."  It was futile, he 
said, to put too much energy into this effort since Iraqi 
businessmen and their Jordanian henchmen had been very clever 
in disguising their transactions.  The pending request for 
detailed information on companies was particularly difficult, 
he said, because companies mentioned were Jordanian firms 
that did legitimate business in Jordan -- whatever else they 
might have been involved in -- and were protected by 
Jordanian bank secrecy.  The Charge stressed our interest in 
recovering stolen assets, not investigating possible past 
sanctions violations. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  Abul Ragheb added that the Iraqi General Council 
delegation that visited Amman earlier in the week (septel) 
had raised with him their interest in the quick return of 
Iraqi assets frozen by Jordan.  Abul Ragheb said that this 
was one of a number of financial and trade issues, including 
the Central Bank of Jordan claims on Iraq and the status of 
pending deliveries under the bilateral trade protocol, that 
needed to be discussed between the two countries. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  Comment:  As the PM's unforthcoming response 
suggests, we are not confident in quick progress on this 
issue.  We will also raise the request in intelligence 
channels.  Planned U.S.-Jordanian meetings in Washington next 
month, including the King's visit, would be other 
opportunities to drive home our points.  Although he is not 
personally involved in the issue, Planning Minister 
Awadallah's September 4 meeting with Treasury U/S Taylor 
would be a chance for Treasury to press a senior Jordanian 
who is close to the King. 
HALE