This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161726Z Oct 03UNCLAS GUATEMALA 002659 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/ES-CR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV OVIP GT
SUBJECT: INAUGURAL INVITATION FOR PRESIDENT BUSH 
 
 
¶1. On October 15, the Embassy received Diplomatic Note number 
9-1452 from the Directorate of Protocol at the Foreign 
Ministry.  The note, unofficially translated in paragraph 2, 
is a cover letter for an invitation to President Bush from 
President Portillo to attend the January 14 inauguration in 
Guatemala City.  Copies of the note and invitation have been 
faxed to WHA/CEN and originals will follow by pouch.  The 
note is dated October 8, and the invitation is dated 
September 31, 2003.  Our unofficial translation of the 
invitation is in paragraph 3. 
 
¶2. Begin text of Diplomatic Note 9-1452: 
 
Ministry of Foreign Relations, Guatemala City, Central America 
 
Note Number MA.9-1452--Protocol 
 
The General Directorate of Protocol and Diplomatic Ceremony 
of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of Guatemala, presents 
its compliments to the Honorable Embassy of the United States 
of America and has the honor to attach an invitation from Mr. 
Alfonso Portillo Cabrera, President of the Republic of 
Guatemala, to his Excellency Mr. George W. Bush, President of 
the United States, to attend the Guatemalan Presidential 
Inauguration on January 14, 2004. 
 
The General Directorate of Protocol and Diplomatic Ceremony 
of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of Guatemala takes this 
opportunity to renew its highest and most distinguished 
considerations to the Honorable Embassy of the United States. 
 
Guatemala, October 8, 2003 
 
Honorable Embassy of the Unites States, Guatemala City 
 
End text of Diplomatic Note. 
 
¶3. Begin text of invitation: 
 
The President of the Republic of Guatemala, Central America 
 
Guatemala, September 30, 2003 
 
Great and Good Friend, 
 
I have the honor to greet your Excellency and extend a 
cordial invitation to your illustrious government to attend 
the Guatemalan Presidential Inauguration that will take place 
in this capital city on January 14, 2004. 
 
I take this occasion to renew to your Excellency assurances 
of my highest and most distinguished considerations. 
 
Signature and Seal of President Portillo 
 
Excellency Mr. George W. Bush 
President of the United States of America, 
Washington DC, USA 
 
End text. 
HAMILTON