This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 005798 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECPS KMPI JO
SUBJECT:  ARAB TELECOM REGULATORS NETWORK: READY FOR PRIME 
TIME? 
 
Ref:  AMMAN 3989 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The Jordanian Telecommunications 
Regulatory Commission (TRC) hosted the first preparatory 
meeting for the Arab Telecommunications Regulators Network 
(ATRN) on August 28-29 in Amman, Jordan.   Delegates from 
twelve countries created a permanent Secretariat and 
produced a series of recommendations for the organizational 
and operating structure of the ATRN.  While the TRC pushed 
to create an ATRN that would strengthen and harmonize 
progressive telecommunications policy across the region, 
strong statements from countries with state-owned 
monopolies brought into question the ability of the network 
to produce substantial productive outcomes.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) An ITU Regional meeting in Algiers in April 2003 
created the ATRN to support regulators in the Arab region 
in the implementation of independent, transparent 
regulation of the telecommunications sector.  The TRC 
hosted the first preparatory meeting hosted in Amman on 
August 28-29 with representatives from Algeria, Kuwait, 
Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Mauritania, Syria, United Arab 
Emirates, the Palestinian Authority, Morocco and Egypt with 
observers from the ITU and Iraq.  (Note: The TRC initially 
invited the CPA, but later rescinded their invitation 
allegedly due to pressure from Algeria and Sudan.  Instead, 
representatives from the Iraqi Post and Telecommunications 
Commission were granted observer status.)  The TRC invited 
EconOff to observe the meeting.  The ATRN meeting divided 
members into four working groups to discuss the aims and 
responsibilities of the ATRN, outline a strategic plan, 
financial issues, and the networks proposed organizational 
structure after which a plenary session was held to discuss 
the recommendations. 
 
¶3. (U) Jordan had hoped that the recommendations of the 
working groups would have laid the groundwork for a stand- 
alone organization governed by an elected board and 
supported by annual membership fees. However, as chair of 
the meeting, Jordan was significantly constrained from 
making strong interventions on these points during 
discussions. Morocco and Algeria dominated the Preparatory 
Meeting with active support from Saudi Arabia and 
Mauritania. (Note: Syria was the only delegation that 
repeatedly intervened with arguments in support of Jordan's 
views.) 
 
¶4. (U) The results of the deliberations are recommendations 
that the organization have no legal existence and be co- 
chaired by the past, present, and future President 
countries of the General Assembly of Parties. The network 
will have no institutional identity outside of the 
Permanent Secretariat - which will be funded by and based 
in Algeria. While the ATRN has no legal authority over its 
members, delegates did give the Secretariat the ability to 
represent Arab regulators at international fora.  The Saudi 
delegate made a push to make the ATRN a functional area of 
the Arab League, however the proposal was quickly opposed 
by the Jordanian delegation. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The ATRN will hold annual meetings of the General 
Assembly, where the host government will hold seminars and 
training workshops. Decisions at the ATRN will be made with 
a two-thirds majority.  (Note: The majority of the 
delegates are representatives from ministries with state 
owned telecom monopolies.  Consequently, countries with 
more progressive telecommunications policies will be 
outnumbered during voting.)  There will be no membership 
fees and, therefore, no budget.  However, individual 
delegates are responsible for their own expenses. 
Attendance to future ATRNs will be limited to delegates 
from regulatory agencies or equivalent regulatory staff 
from Telecommunications Ministries.  IT associations and 
outside parties may attend as observers based on written 
request to the Secretariat. (Comment: Given the Algerians' 
role as Permanent Secretariat and their role in restricting 
CPA's participation, further U.S. participation is 
uncertain.) 
 
¶6. (U) During the next ATRN meeting in Amman in March 2004, 
delegates will vote on the recommendations made during this 
meeting.  Jordan will prepare a strategic plan for the 
network for debate at the next meeting.  Algeria stated its 
intention to have a Secretariat in place by March 2004. 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  The first preparatory meeting of the 
ATRN was both a major step forward and a disappointment. 
The ATRN provides a needed organizational framework where 
participating countries can share regulatory information. 
A USAID-financed consultant who helped develop the 
meeting's agenda told Econoff that Jordan plans to draft 
the strategic plan with the underlying themes of 
harmonization of best practices, telecom liberalization and 
the creation of an open investment climate.  However, the 
significant role and representational authority given to 
the Government of Algeria is worrisome.  The delegate from 
Kuwait expressed his disappointment to EconOff that the 
ATRN would not provide the government of Kuwait with the 
technical assistance needed to modernize its 
telecommunications practices.  Jordan's leadership during 
the formative stages of the ATRN is crucial to making the 
ATRN a vehicle for productive reform in the region.  End 
COMMENT 
GNEHM