This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 COLOMBO 000695 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR D, INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS(FOR JWALLER); SA/PD (FOR LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, 
WREINCKENS); SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY - LTTE SUSPENDS PEACE TALKS 
 
¶1.  On April 21, the LTTE announced it suspending peace 
talks scheduled for April 29 in Thailand.  In a letter to 
the GSL, the LTTE listed its reasons for suspending talks 
as: its exclusion from the 4/14 Washington Conference, 
problems with the ceasefire accord implementation, and that 
GSL had not focused enough on rebuilding the economy of the 
North and East.  From 4/21 to 4/23, English, Sinhala and 
Tamil media covered the story extensively and with a mostly 
optimistic slant.  One English editorial focused on 
promoting rule of law and democracy, while another 
encouraged the government not to cave in to the LTTE. 
Editorials from Tamil and Sinhala papers encouraged the 
continuation of the peace process. 
 
----- 
Television. 
----- 
 
¶2. In their 4/21 and 4/22 newscasts Sri Lankan telecasters 
reacted to the LTTE suspension of peace talks with stories 
similar to independent MTV's (4/21): "LTTE pull out of 
peace talks temporarily because they were not invited to 
the Washington conference, living conditions of people in 
the North and East, and lack of normalcy in the North and 
East."   4/22 reactions continued to react to the LTTE 
pull-out.   Independent MTV ran stories about  "PM and 
President discussion regarding LTTE's suspension of peace 
talks, and "The sub committee meeting on emergency 
resettlement will take place as scheduled."   State-owned 
SLRC ran stories about "PM fully concentrates on reasons 
for LTTE's temporary pull out of peace talks," and "PM and 
President discuss LTTE's pull out of peace talks." 
 
----- 
Newspapers. 
----- 
 
¶3. Most English and vernacular newspaper headlines on 4/22 
focused on the LTTE pull-out from the talks, but many with 
an optimistic slant.  On 4/22 Independent English daily, 
MIRROR's leader "LTTE pulls out of peace talks," was echoed 
by headlines in the English, Sinhala and Tamil dailies. 
The independent THINAKKURAL noted "Peace talks temporarily 
suspended."  The sentiment of a temporary suspension also 
showed in up in most other Tamil and Sinhala dailies' 
headlines.   Government-owned Sinhala daily, DINAMINA 
noted, "LTTE withdraws temporarily out of peace talks - But 
it's not moving out of the peace process," while 
independent Sinhala daily LANKADEEPA also noted, "Stance to 
seek solution through negotiations, however remains." 
 
4/23 headlines were similarly reassuring.  Independent 
English daily, the MIRROR noted,  "PM calm, monitors 
confident, " "President hopes peace talks will resume 
soon," and that "US expects talks to resume soon." 
Opposition daily, the ISLAND said "CBK dissatisfied at 
LTTE's unilateral decision" and "LTTE assures SLMM: Will 
abide by MoU."  Government owned English DAILY NEWS noted, 
"LTTE pledges to honour ceasefire."  From independent 
Sinhala daily LAKBIMA came, ""Bala says that they still 
would not walk out of the process of seeking a political 
solution." 
 
4/23 headlines in the Tamil press were concerned with 
security and maintaining the peace.  "Independent Tamil 
daily THINAKKURAL: "President orders to enforce the 
security of 1995,"  State owned Tamil daily THINAKARAN: 
"Tigers assure that they would continue cessation of 
hostilities," and also noted that "Tamil National Alliance 
fully endorses Tigers' decision."  The independent Tamil 
daily VIRAKESARI said "Even though Tigers withdrew from 
peace talks temporarily, peace efforts will not be 
interrupted" - believes Minister G.L. Peiris" and also ran 
a sub-headline noting, ""Although we withdrew from talks, 
we have no idea of engaging in war" says V. Balakumaran, 
Senior LTTE Member."  From Independent Tamil daily SUDAR 
OLI: "Big security nets in Colombo (Capital) after Tiger 
pullout" and "President unhappy about Tigers withdrawal." 
 
----- 
Editorials. 
----- 
 
¶4. Under the headline " Urgent tasks at hand," Government- 
owned English DAILY NEWS noted (4/23) "that firm 
enforcement of the Rule of Law is an essential precondition 
for peace."  Excerpts: 
"While the LTTE's decision to suspend peace talks with the 
Government "on certain critical issues" is likely to cause 
considerable worry among the peace-loving public, our wish 
is that every effort would be made by the main parties to 
resume the negotiatory process." 
"We hope an earnest effort would be made by these parties 
to resolve their differences without further delay, for 
what is at stake is the country's future." 
"Although it is encouraging to note that the LTTE has vowed 
to remain within the negotiatory process aimed at arriving 
at a political solution to the conflict, the chief parties 
may need to engage each other in an exchange of views as 
early as possible for the purpose of clarifying outstanding 
issues." 
"However, there is no getting away from the need for 
creating a democratic ethos at all societal levels - 
grassroots or otherwise. This would necessitate the 
recognition and respecting of each others rights on the 
part of communities. The exercise of violent coercion by 
any party would be a violation of this important 
foundational principle for peace." 
"The firm enforcement of the Rule of Law is an essential 
precondition for the establishment of societal stability." 
 
 
¶5. Under the headline " The folly of equating terrorists to 
a government " Opposition daily the ISLAND commented (4/23) 
that "government should not cave in" to the LTTE. 
Excerpts: 
 
"We do concede that the Sri Lanka government has to take 
the rap for this infuriation. Despite common-sense and all 
experience in international negotiations indicating that it 
would be extremely counterproductive to deproscribe the 
LTTE, it being an international terrorist organisation, the 
Sri Lanka government yielded to LTTE blackmail of refusing 
to commence negotiations, unless their proscription was 
removed. Having thus proclaimed themselves as an ` equal 
party' to the democratic and sovereign government, the 
Tigers have since then proceeded on the premise that they 
are an independent nation not giving a damn to what the Sri 
Lanka government did or said. Nor did they give two hoots 
for the opinion of the so- called international community." 
"They flouted the law of the land, the Memorandum of 
Understanding whose provisions they were bound to observe, 
violated international law and continued merrily with their 
patrons, the Norwegian Peace Monitors being blind to such 
violations and even tacitly sanctioning them while treating 
the terrorists and the government as equal parties. Child 
abduction, establishment of Kangaroo Courts, an illegal 
army, police force, police stations were all approved or 
ignored. Arms were smuggled in, ships sunk - even foreign 
ships - but the Sri Lankan government, the international 
community nor the Peace Monitors said nary a word." 
"The fundamental flaw in this peace process is the 
presumption by the LTTE that it is on par with the state of 
Sri Lanka and have the right to act as a sovereign state. 
Be it the abduction of children for Baby Brigades, 
establishment of Kangaroo courts, smuggling of arms, 
sinking of ships, marching through security camps of the 
government forces, the LTTE has presumed and acted in a 
manner that they enjoy the same status as the Sri Lanka 
government. And for once when a foreign government, because 
of its own legal compulsions, does not invite them for a 
conference, they are ` furious'" 
"Another major flaw in this peace process has been that the 
government-as we have pointed out in innumerable 
editorials-is conceding most of the major demands made by 
the LTTE. So far the peace process has mainly been one way 
. The only major demand refused by the government has been 
the rejection of the demand to move the armed forces out of 
the High Security Zones in the North because of very valid 
and compelling reasons." 
The government should not cave in and President Kumaratunga 
should use her powers to help the Prime Minister not to be 
blackmailed. 
 
¶6. Under the headline "Talks should continue," independent 
Tamil daily VIRAKESARI commented (4/23) "If the talks do 
not continue it will be a victory for those working against 
peace."  Exerpts: 
 
"The commitment and giving in policy of the Tigers to 
achieve peace, clearly helped them tearing away the 
terrorist labels on them. Tigers were able to show the 
international community that the y are committed to peace 
and are looking forward to permanent peace through 
negotiated settlement. " 
 
"Ceasefire and peace talks created this environment. It is 
true that the chauvinist groups are planning hard to derail 
the talks. It is very important that the peace lovers work 
vigilantly and with caution, without getting caught to 
these elements." 
 
"This is the situation the talks have reached now. If the 
talks do not continue it will be a victory for those 
working against peace. " 
 
"Failure of governments to keep its promises is a trend in 
this country. This has caused some doubt in the minds of 
tigers. Lot of trust building was experienced during the 
last one year, and the talks should continue and this 
country should create history for the whole world to 
admire. " 
 
 ¶7. Under the headline "Increased need of dedication," 
Government owned Sinhala Daily DINAMINA commented (4/23) 
that the "Public should be keen to let both parties focus 
on peace" and "should not act emotionally."  Excerpts: 
 
"This type of set backs are normal....People in North as 
well as the South are thankful to LTTE for not opting to 
war...." 
 
"The atmosphere is challenging both for communities in the 
North and South-as peace lovers all should request both 
parties to stick to PEACE..." 
 
"All should be aware of opportunists... they should not be 
lured into war...these groups say that SLG was ever willing 
to give into all demands of LTTE. But The PM's letter to 
LTTE has showed that it's not the case.... 
 
"National and international preference is for peace... 
difficult for LTTE too to detour...both parties have their 
extremists..." 
 
"Public should be keen to let both parties focus on 
peace...should not act emotionally...need to act maturely 
towards the welfare of Sri Lanka".  WILLS