This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161347Z Sep 03S E C R E T AMMAN 005965 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARN, NEA/NGA 
CENTCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2013 
TAGS: MOPS PREL IZ JO
SUBJECT: UNINTENDED BUT EFFECTIVE CLOSURE OF JORDAN-IRAQ 
BORDER FOR TRAVELERS AGED 20-45 
 
REF: AMMAN 4763 
 
Classified By: CDA David M. Hale for reasons 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  U.S. military units on the Jordan-Iraq border 
unintentionally but effectively closed the border to 
Iraq-bound traffic on September 15.  GOJ MFA and security 
officials queried the Embassy, seeking an explanation. 
Embassy officers contacted U.S. military command units in 
Iraq, who indicated that there was no intent to close the 
Jordan-Iraq border, and any such orders would be rescinded. 
An Embassy military liaison officer visited the border 
September 16 and reported that the border was open again. 
Post recommends that, if there is a need for more stringent 
controls on the Jordan-Iraq border, CPA and the USG 
coordinate in advance with the GOJ.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------- 
3ACR CLOSES THE BORDER FOR A DAY 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Personnel serving in the Humanitarian Assistance 
Coordination Center (HACC-West) reported September 15 that 
U.S. military forces on the Iraq-Jordan border (3ACR) had on 
September 15 prevented entry to Iraq for most persons of both 
genders aged 20-45 years, both Iraqi and non-Iraqi citizens. 
According to 3ACR sources, they were also instructed to limit 
commercial vehicles to drivers only, and humanitarian 
assistance shipments to drivers and "assist teams" only. 
3ACR said it permitted all westbound (i.e. Iraq to Jordan) 
traffic to go to the Jordanian border crossing point. 
However, all persons denied entry to Jordan were required to 
wait until the following day before requesting re-admission 
to Iraq (effectively making them spend the night in no mans 
land). 
 
¶3.  (C)  A Jordanian who does business in Iraq called PolOff 
September 15 to report that "American soldiers" were 
preventing access to Iraq for "a large group" of Jordanians 
at the border.  He claimed that this group included three 
Iraqi-American women who carried U.S. passports. 
 
¶4.  (S)  Embassy and HACC officers contacted U.S. military 
units in Iraq on the evening of September 15 to clarify the 
situation.  We understood from the responses that a closure 
of the Jordan-Iraq border had never been intended, and that 
commanders in Baghdad would issue instructions to return 
immediately to the status quo ante.  A HACC liaison officer 
arrived at the border September 16 and, after meeting with 
Jordanian Armed Forces personnel and touring the border area, 
determined that traffic is again moving into Iraq, and that 
the backup resulting from the September 15 closure had been 
cleared. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
GOJ ASKS FOR CLARIFICATION, COORDINATION 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S)  Separately, Jordanian MFA and security officials 
asked the Embassy for clarification of coalition policy on 
crossing into Iraq.  The MFA asked that, in the future, the 
coalition coordinate with the GOJ any steps that would have 
the effect of restricting crossings into Iraq (ref). 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6.  (S)  For use with GOJ contacts, it would be helpful to 
have from CPA and CENTCOM clarification of the control policy 
currently in effect on the Jordan-Iraq border.  We had 
understood that a draft order was working through CENTCOM to 
apply an exclusion policy for males from 16-45 trying to 
cross the Syrian border into Iraq.  Jordan seems to have been 
inadvertently included in this policy.  Restricting the entry 
of Jordanians into Iraq could complicate our efforts to 
promote official exchanges between Jordan and Iraq.  If there 
is a need to restrict travel from Jordan into Iraq for 
security reasons, we recommend advance coordination with the 
GOJ to examine other, less draconian options. 
 
¶7.  (U)  CPA Baghdad minimize considered. 
HALE