This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 COLOMBO 001028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Department for D (Gastright), INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC, 
SA (CAMP, WALLER), SA/PD (BRENNIG, IRWIN, SCENSNY), 
SSA/PAS; SSO (PASS TO D); TOKYO (HARA, BRYAN) 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  (JUNE 12) TOKYO CONFERENCE 
 
¶1. Summary.   Sri Lankan media coverage of the Tokyo Donor 
Conference and its implications lessened somewhat, but was 
still energetic.  Tamil newspapers' lead headlines 
concentrated on the LTTE rejection of Prime Minister Ranil 
Wickremesinghe's suggested interim administration for the 
north and east.  Tamil editorial commentary was robust. 
While pro-LTTE SUDAR OLI's editorial quoted an LTTE Eastern 
politico's comments about the need to "regroup" Tamil 
forces, other editorials focused on government cooperation 
with the Tigers.  Guarded optimism was the order of the day 
for government-owned media.  The Tigers' rejection of an 
interim administration was the big story in opposition and 
independent media.  End summary. 
 
----- 
¶2. LTTE statements and other Tamil reaction. 
----- 
Tamil newspapers' lead headlines concentrated on the LTTE 
rejection of Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe's 
suggested interim administration for the north and east. 
Pro-LTTE daily, SUDAR OLI reported, "`Tigers reject the 
provisional administrative structure proposed by Prime 
Minister at the Tokyo Conference - Need the interim 
administrative structure to resume talks' - Official 
statement by LTTE issued from Kilinochchi HQ."  This 
headline was closely echoed by independent dailies 
VIRAKESARI and THINAKKURAL.  State-owned THINAKARAN 
downplayed its story, "Tigers demand submission of the 
draft framework of the interim administrative structure," 
by placing it low on its front page. 
 
The primary source for these stories was likely Pro-LTTE 
TamilNet's web headline,  "LTTE insists on draft framework 
for interim administration to resume talks." 
 
Block quote. 
 
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in an official 
statement issued from its headquarters in Kilinochchi, 
northern Sri Lanka Wednesday reiterated its position that 
it would participate in the negotiating process only when 
the Sri Lankan government puts forward a clearly defined 
draft framework for an interim administrative structure for 
the Northeast. 
 
End block quote. 
 
Tamil newspapers also reported on Deputy Minister of 
Finance Bandula Gunawardena's remarks.  Independent daily 
THINAKURAL quoted him, "There won't be an immediate effect 
on the economy by the assistance assured in Tokyo," and, 
"Separate administrative structure for proper utilization 
of the assistance received at the Tokyo Conference,' in 
state-owned THINAKARAN. 
 
Tamil editorial commentary was robust.  While pro-LTTE 
SUDAR OLI's editorial quoted an LTTE Eastern politico 
comments about the need to "regroup" Tamil forces, other 
editorials focused on government cooperation with the 
Tigers. 
 
--- Pro-LTTE SUDAR OLI's editorial headline, "Can we reach 
the target under present circumstances?" referred to a 
peaceful Sri Lanka, but its core message was about the 
threat presidential control of the armed forces poses to 
the peace process, "Without a structure to control the 
[armed] forces, the Prime Minister will not be able to 
reach his target, however much he may be committed to 
peace." 
 
Block quotes. 
 
Commitment of the international community for peace and its 
assistance has allowed Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe 
to continue the peace process with new energy. 
His United National Party has not got an absolute majority 
in the parliament. 
 
President Chandrika Kumaratunge, the leader of the 
opposition party, knows the weakness of the government, 
which she uses to her benefit.  She is taming the 
government and showing her executive powers as the 
president with threat of dissolution of parliament. The JVP 
and other racist groups are rousing her. 
 
There's wide accusation that the President manipulates a 
section of the [armed] forces, as the head of the [armed] 
forces, to discredit the government and to disrupt the 
peace efforts. 
 
¶E. Kausalyan, LTTE political leader in Batticaloa/Ampara 
Districts condemned the actions of the [armed] forces in a 
meeting that took place at the Divisional Secretariat in 
Aalaiyady Vembu in the East on June 10.  There he said: 
 
`We are taking steps to rebuild good relations between 
Tamils and Muslims, forgetting the sour experiences of the 
war situation, which created division in the longstanding 
relationship we have been enjoying for a very long time. 
 
`Certain actions of the government forces are disturbing. 
On June 4, One of our fighters was arrested in the 
Batticaloa District in connection with a murder for which 
he was innocent and had no connection whatsoever. This 
happened because of the mistake of the police. 
 
`The forces are trying to drag us into the war when we are 
committed to peace.  When considering all these, it is 
evident that we need to regroup our Tamil forces.  The 
atrocities of the [armed] forces are growing day after day. 
They seem to be working against peace. 
 
`We are ones to stop the war. We are aware of the effects 
of the war. We are not for war again,' he said. 
 
Without a structure to control the forces, the Prime 
Minister will not be able to reach his target, however much 
he may be committed to peace. 
 
End block quotes. 
 
--- Under the headline, "Tokyo declaration," independent 
daily, VIRAKESARI commented, "What Sri Lanka has is an 
ethnic problem and the international community has accepted 
that in finding solution to the problem, Tiger involvement 
is very essential." 
 
 
 Block quotes. 
 
Many participating countries expressed their concern over 
LTTE boycott. Those countries pointed out that the LTTE 
should not be betrayed, but this opportunity has been 
afforded to resume talks with them and continue with the 
peace efforts. 
 
The request of the donor countries and the declaration on 
the final day of the conference clearly show that the 
country's ethnic problem should be solved through a 
suitable political solution to attain lasting peace. 
 
From time to time, the Opposition parties and the racists 
try to argue that the problem in Sri Lanka is not ethnic 
but terrorist. What Sri Lanka has is an ethnic problem and 
the international community has accepted that in finding 
solution to the problem, Tiger involvement is very 
essential. 
 
President's party has repeatedly stated that the assistance 
was not aid but loan. She has appointed a 7 member 
committee to study the speeches delivered by the Prime 
Minister at the Tokyo Conference. PA has accused that 90% 
of the assistance comes as loans and every citizen of this 
country would become a debtor by a further sum of Rs 22,000 
each. 
 
From the day of Independence country has been depending on 
foreign loans. Today the country has almost lost its 
independence through dependence. When we fail to solve our 
problems amicably, they turn out to be international 
problems, and their assistance becomes necessary. 
 
End block quotes. 
 
--- Under the headline, "Hereafter, we should straighten up 
peaceful politics,"   independent daily, THINAKKURAL 
observed, "Resumption of talks and leading the country to a 
lasting peace lie in the firmness of the Prime Minister in 
carrying out his promises and the support of the LTTE." 
 
Block quotes. 
 
Likewise, Japanese Special Envoy Yasusi Akashi will travel 
to London to meet LTTE Theoretician Anton Balasingham. In 
brief, the international community is not just interested, 
but has taken a stern stand that the peace efforts should 
continue on the correct path. 
 
The assistance provided by the International Community 
should hasten the resumption of talks.  The PA is in their 
original stand opposing the efforts of the Prime Minister. 
They accuse that this assistance has driven the country 
further into debt. 
 
When the country is to be regained and efforts are being 
taken to solve the basic problems of this country through 
the assistance of the international community, what the 
opposition is trying is not acceptable. 
 
Resumption of talks and leading the country to lasting a 
peace lie in the firmness of the Prime Minister in carrying 
out his promises and the support of the LTTE. 
 
End block quotes. 
 
--- Under the headline, "Great victory for Sri Lanka in 
Japan," state-owned daily THINAKARAN commented, "The 
racists should know their efforts to disrupt the peace 
process initiated by Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe 
and LTTE leader Velupillai Prabakaran will not succeed 
because the majority of the people are for peace." 
 
Block quotes. 
 
The Prime Minister in his address clearly stated the 
necessity of a provisional administrative structure, 
something very similar to the interim administrative 
structure demanded by the LTTE. It is very clear that no 
development could be done in the NE without the 
participation of the Tigers. There's no argument regarding 
Tigers handling the assistance provided by the 
international community as the administration in the NE is 
under the LTTE. 
 
The political parties that boast of representing the people 
of the South and the Sinhalese people were dumb founded 
about the flood victims until the Tigers came from the 
north with flood relief. Such racist parties should learn 
from the Liberation Tigers regarding humanitarian services. 
The racists should know their efforts to disrupt the peace 
process initiated by Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe 
and LTTE leader Velupillai Prabakaran will not succeed 
because the majority of the people are for peace. 
 
The aid received in the Tokyo Conference would be spent in 
war-affected areas in NE. As there's peoples' support to 
these leaders, there's no doubt that their efforts would 
succeed. 
 
End block quotes. 
 
----- 
¶3. GSL statements and pro-government reaction. 
----- 
Guarded optimism was the order of the day for government- 
owned media.    Although state-owned television and radio 
stations carried stories about the LTTE's rejection of the 
Prime Minister's interim authority for the north and east, 
newspapers downplayed it.  State-owned English DAILY NEWS' 
lead headline trumpeted, "Foreign funds will accelerate 
socio-economic recovery - PM, and relegated "LTTE insists 
on draft framework for interim administration to resume 
talks," to the bottom of its front page.  State-owned 
Sinhala sister DINAMINA reported, "`When GSL officially 
announces decisions on the Tokyo conference, [LTTE] shall 
respond'-says LTTE," and favorably covered the investor's 
conference immediately following Tokyo, "Japan bank 
coordinated conference gets overwhelming attendance of 
investors - result of the success of the confab." 
--- Under the editorial headline, "Defining the looming 
challenges," state-owned English DAILY NEWS acknowledged, 
"The LTTE. has been fighting for power. A challenge for the 
future for the Lankan polity is to balance these 
conflicting demands in. an innovative administrative 
structure for the North-East." 
Block quotes. 
With the landmark Tokyo aid donors' conference ending on a 
clear note of triumph for Sri Lanka, the subsequent and 
more arduous phases of "Regaining Sri Lanka" have now 
begun. 
That is, to make concrete, verifiable and substantial 
progress in resolving our conflict by political means. That 
is, the peace process must be resumed with the 
participation of the LTTE and taken to its logical 
conclusion. 
However, before further efforts are made to re-involve the 
LTTE in the peace process, some stark facts need to be 
recognized. Prime among these is the need to ensure a 
substantial role for the LTTE in the refashioned 
administrative structure for the development of the North- 
East. The LTTE, it needs to be realised, has been fighting 
for power. 
A challenge for the future for the Lankan polity is to 
balance these conflicting demands in, indeed, an innovative 
administrative structure for the North-East. 
Some of the standards, which the parties to the peace 
process would need to conform to in the socio-economic 
sphere have been outlined by US Deputy Secretary of State 
Richard Armitage. These are fairness, transparency and 
accountability. 
Accordingly, the creative potential of the people needs to 
be tapped in the development exercise. They need to be 
encouraged to play an active and creative role in their 
deliverance from poverty. They need to be conscientized 
into believing that they are dynamic agents in their 
struggle against poverty, rather than being mere, passive, 
recipients of aid. The latter leads to self-destructive 
dependence. 
End block quotes. 
---- 
¶4. Opposition statements and pro-opposition reaction. 
----- 
The Tigers' rejection of the Prime Minister's interim 
administration was the big story in opposition newspaper 
headlines.  Independent, but nationalist-leaning, English 
daily ISLAND blared, "Tigers reject Ranil's latest offer 
made in Tokyo," on its front page.  Stirring the 
sensibilities of its southern base, the ISLAND added, 
"Tokyo Declaration ignores those disabled outside N-E," and 
"Transparency, accountability a must in proposed 
development mechanism of NE."  Sister paper Sinhala daily 
DIVAINA was calmer, and reported, "`LTTE officially 
announces- if a clear draft of the interim administration 
is done, they will return to peace talks." 
 
--- Under the headline, "After the Tokyo Conference," 
independent, but nationalist-leaning, English daily ISLAND 
commented, ".it appears that the moment of truth arrived 
for the LTTE when they realised that at Tokyo they would 
have to commit themselves to democracy and human rights - 
all of which are extremely destructive to an organisation 
that is bound together and driven forward by sheer forces 
of terror." 
Block quotes. 
It was only on Tuesday night when two LTTE cadres were 
stopped by the police on Galle Road Wellawattte that one of 
them swallowed a cyanide capsule. Do organisations 
committed to peace and human rights get their cadres to 
take cyanide capsules? 
It does appear that the moment of truth arrived for the 
LTTE when they realised that at Tokyo they would have to 
commit themselves to democracy and human rights - all of 
which are extremely destructive to an organisation that is 
bound together and driven forward by sheer forces of 
terror. 
While the Conference is supposed to have been on 
`regaining' entire Sri Lanka, it does appear that in 
certain aspects, the South and the people of the South, 
appear to be forgotten. 
With the LTTE boycott and the successful Tokyo Conference, 
an entirely new game has commenced. The government, if it 
caves into LTTE demands as before, will be kicking into its 
own goal,once again. 
End block quotes. 
 
----- 
¶5. Independent media reaction 
----- 
Independent television and radio carried the LTTE rejection 
of an interim administration in English and vernacular 
broadcasts.  Independent English DAILY MIRROR reserved 
their lead story for, "New economic tie-up with Japan - PM 
thrilled by Tokyo vote of confidence in Sri Lanka's 
potential," and also reported, "Tokyo Declaration in no way 
is binding on us -Tigers."  Independent Sinhala daily 
LANKADEEPA headlined, "No interim administration draft, no 
talks; LTTE rejects GSL's latest proposal," and quoted 
leader of the LTTE's political wing, Tamilchelvan, "GSL 
commitment on an interim admin is adequate to initiate 
talks." 
 
English and Sinhala independent editorialists were silent. 
 
Wills