This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 000885 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT. PLS. PASS TO EUR/SCC WESTON, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2013 
TAGS: PREL CY TU GR
SUBJECT: MFA REACTION TO CONGRESSIONAL DRAFT RESOLUTION ON 
CYPRUS 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch.  Reasons: 1.5(b)(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) MFA Cyprus DG Ertugrul Apakan called us Feb. 4 to pass 
on GOT views about the draft resolution on Cyprus currently 
circulating on the Hill. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Apakan stated that the GOT disagrees wholly with the 
substance of the draft resolution.  He offered the following 
comments, which he said represented the coordinated position 
of the MFA: 
 
 
-- Turkey has strong reservations about the timing of the 
resolution draft.  "We don't want two crises -- Iraq and 
Cyprus -- at the same time.  The resolution will not be 
helpful on Iraq," particularly regarding  attitudes in the 
Turkish Parliament; 
 
 
-- If the draft goes ahead as is, the AK Government will 
"find itself cornered" and unable to explain to either the 
Turkish people or to the Parliament the USG's position; 
 
 
-- "We are at a critical stage in the Cyprus negotiating 
process; this is most unhelpful"; 
 
 
-- The admission of "Greek Cyprus'" to the EU will usher in 
uncertainties and cause problems for Turkey and others; 
 
 
-- Turkey maintains the rights of a guarantor power on Cyprus 
pursuant to relevant treaties; "no one -- not even the UN -- 
has the right to refer to Turkey as an 'occupying power'"; 
 
 
-- "TRNC President" Denktas is doing his best to find a 
solution to the Cyprus problem.  Cyprus President, Clerides, 
he insisted, was not/not ready to sign the Annan plan at the 
EU Copenhagen summit, perceptions to the contrary 
notwithstanding.  David Hannay himself recently confirmed 
this to Turkey; 
 
 
-- New, "reputable" public opinion polls on Cyprus show 
support for Denktas is high. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Comment:  MFA's sensitivities and attitudes toward 
Cyprus are not new.  What is at issue here, however, is the 
prospect that the draft resolution uproar will be used by 
conservative elements in the MFA and other GOT bureaucracies 
to dig in their heels against a possible move to settlement. 
 
 
PEARSON