This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000339 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL ADCO ADPM YM ECON COM
SUBJECT: YEMENI FM AND AMBASSADOR DISCUSS USG ASSISTANCE, 
POUCH AND OTHER MATTERS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 40782 
 
Classified By: Acting Pol/Econ Chief Catherine J. Westley for Reason 1. 
5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  The Ambassador briefed the Foreign 
Minister on his recent Washington consultations at a meeting 
on February 18.  He detailed current and potential USG 
assistance in several areas and brought up the pouch issue 
for closure.  FM Qirbi expressed appreciation for continued 
U.S.-Yemen cooperation in all areas.  The Ambassador and FM 
also discussed Yemen's assurances on Yemen-North Korea 
missile cooperation and the Iraq situation (septels). 
Yemen's leading daily Al-Thawra carried a factual front-page 
account of the meeting February 19.  End Summary. 
 
-------------- 
USG Assistance 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  The Ambassador briefed Qirbi on several areas on USG 
assistance, including possible budget allocations for 
security and economic assistance, prospects for food aid and 
Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) assistance, current 
democratic development assistance and Yemen's candidacy for 
inclusion in the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA). 
 
¶3.  (C)  The Ambassador noted that Yemen and Morocco are the 
two leading countries from the Middle East for consideration 
in the MCA, but cautioned Qirbi not to be too hopeful in the 
near term.  While Yemen is well-positioned in many areas such 
as political reform, fiscal responsibility and health and 
education expenditures, there is more work to be done.  The 
ROYG, the USG and the World Bank should work together to make 
sure that needed reforms are undertaken.  Qirbi agreed on the 
vital importance of working together to ensure Yemen remains 
a leading candidate.  He noted that even with elections 
looming, the ROYG could develop a reform agenda now that 
includes steps relevant to the MCA. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Qirbi said it was encouraging to hear good news on 
the assistance front, and said it was a result of good 
cooperation and a frequent exchange of views. 
 
---------------------- 
Pouch and Escape Masks 
---------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Qirbi said that he had still been unable to finalize 
the pouch issue with PSO Chief Gamish because both had been 
traveling at different times.  He undertook to speak to 
Gamish before leaving for a Malaysia trip on February 19. 
Qirbi assured the Ambassador that he had been told that the 
escape masks stuck in Customs were being released today 
(February 18).  However, post has not yet received the masks 
as of late afternoon. 
 
------------- 
Other Matters 
------------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  Qirbi agreed to pass on President Bush's letter to 
President Saleh thanking him for Saleh's condolences on the 
Space Shuttle tragedy (ref). 
 
¶7.  (U)  Also present at the meeting were MFA Advisor 
al-Iryani, DCM, DATT and Acting Pol/Econ Chief (notetaker). 
HULL