This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR, S/CPR and EUR/UBI; S/CT, EB/ESC/ESP, 
DOJ for OIA/JUDI FRIEDMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL NA NL
SUBJECT: RESTRAINED DUTCH REACTION TO LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN 
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES 
 
REF: CURACAO 607 
 
¶1. Summary: Dutch government and party spokesmen are clearly 
unhappy with the appointment of inexperienced Mirna Godett 
as the new Prime Minister of the Netherlands Antilles, as 
well as with the criticism and inflammatory statements 
directed against the Netherlands by her brother, political 
strongman Anthony Godett and his claims to be the power 
behind the throne.  However, GoNL leaders are cautious not 
to be drawn into a public row, stressing the importance of 
good relations and keeping the Antilles together.  The GoNL 
recognizes the need for change in the political structure 
and financial relations with Antilles but does not view 
independence of the Antilles as a positive step, citing good 
law enforcement cooperation as a common interest to the 
entire Kingdom of the Netherlands.  Upcoming visits by a 
senior Dutch parliamentary delegation and the Dutch Justice 
Minister will serve as test cases for the state of Dutch- 
Antillean relations. End summary. 
 
Questions over appointment of Mirna Godett 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. The appointment of Mirna Godett, sister of POL party 
leader Anthony Godett (reftel), as Prime Minister of the 
Netherlands Antilles has caused consternation among Dutch 
politicians.  The fact that she stepped in for her brother 
Anthony Godett, who could not become Prime Minister because 
of a corruption investigation, was dismissed by many as 
objectionable and undemocratic.  Party spokesmen fear that 
her appointment will affect stability in the Antilles and 
result in a change for the worse in Kingdom relations.  They 
also question her qualifications, as she has hardly any 
education and no political experience. 
 
Press conference of Mirna and Anthony Godett 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. No doubt prompted by the adverse reactions in the 
Netherlands, Mirna and Anthony Godett gave a joint press 
conference to the Dutch press on August 12, one day after 
she was sworn in as PM.  Mirna, while stating that her main 
goal was to improve relations with the Netherlands, charged 
that the Dutch often had no understanding of the Antilles' 
position.  Both Anthony and Mirna demanded greater respect 
from the Netherlands, as well as to be treated as equal 
partners.  "Mutual respect is not imposing one's position on 
the other like the Netherlands does, governing with the 
remote control and threatening via the IMF to impose even 
more austerity measures."  Mirna also rejected the Dutch 
reproach that the Antilles are run by the mob.  "When it 
comes to Mafiosi and corrupt figures, the Netherlands has 
the lead, also in politics but I won't cite names." 
 
¶4. Anthony Godett charged that the Netherlands, "as a 
colonial power," should give the Antilles a significantly 
higher amount of money. He wants no further dealings with 
the IMF, stating that the IMF has "killed the patient."  He 
opined that the money that is now spent by the GoNL on 
dealing with drug couriers (such as on the much-contested 
body scan system at Curacao's Hato airport) should instead 
be spent on education, employment and special projects in 
the Antilles.  Despite such calls for increased funding, 
Godett spoke of proposing a separate status within the 
Kingdom, similar to that of Aruba, with full independence in 
due course. In a move that further demonstrates his distaste 
for the Dutch, Anthony advocated changing the official 
language of the Antilles from Dutch to English. 
 
Dutch Reactions to Press Conference 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5. Dutch politicians were not amused by what they called 
"unnecessary provocations" at the press conference, which 
they fear could have an adverse effect in the Dutch 
parliament.  Still, they preferred to avoid a public fight 
with the Antilles in the media.  "It seems better not to 
react.  Any reaction is oil on the fire," said Labor party 
spokesman John Leerdam. Prime Minister Balkenende and 
Kingdom Affairs Minister Thom de Graaf stated they assume 
that good relations will continue until proven otherwise. 
Note:  Since the integrity of Mirna Godett has not been 
called into question, the GONL regards her as its main 
interlocutor.  End Note. 
 
¶6. However, in responding to the Godetts' complaints, 
Kingdom Affairs Minister De Graaf recognized that no one in 
the Antilles is happy with the way in which the Antilles is 
currently organized.  He is prepared to talk with the 
Antillean government about changing the political and 
financial setup with and within the Antilles.  For example, 
he favors granting the individual Antillean islands more 
autonomy in relation to the national Antillean government on 
Curacao. 
¶7. De Graaf objects to granting Curacao a separate status 
within the Kingdom because the GoNL believes this will only 
result in the disintegration of the Antilles and will not 
resolve any of Curacao's real social, financial and economic 
problems.  He noted that it had been a mistake to grant 
Aruba a separate status. "Curacao can choose for either full 
cooperation within the Kingdom or independence, but not 
something in-between."  De Graaf also went on to acknowledge 
that the 1954 Statute of the Kingdom of the Netherlands is 
out of date.  The Netherlands is now embedded in Europe, and 
de Graaf proposed that Aruba and the Antilles decide within 
two years if they want ultra-periphery EU status.  De Graaf 
commented "The status of ultra-periphery EU status signifies 
that these countries must adopt the whole EU legislation, 
which has major consequences.  My goal is not to get rid of 
the Antilles and Aruba.  For this I find our common history 
too valuable.  But things must change in the relationship in 
order to sustain it." 
 
¶8. De Graaf doubts that an independent Curacao could survive 
economically and could do what is necessary to combat drugs 
and terrorism.  "It would make more sense if we worked hard 
on a few very good concrete agreements on the political and 
financial reorganization of the Antilles, a good socio- 
economic policy and a joint approach to law enforcement." 
De Graaf continues to place emphasis on law enforcement, 
noting that it is an issue of major importance to the entire 
Kingdom which must be addressed at all levels.  In 
responding to a call to remove the body scan system (placed 
to detect cocaine balloon swallowers) at Hato airport, de 
Graaf noted that the GoNL could not stop the Antillean 
government from doing so, but that such actions would affect 
the relationship, law enforcement programs, and financial 
relations. 
 
Parliamentary visit called into question 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. In late August, the leaders of political parties in the 
Dutch parliament plan to visit the Antilles.  Said Anthony, 
"Mirna won't have time for them.  The Prime Minister and FOL 
ministers won't receive them.  They are simply lower in 
hierarchy.  I will do the job for her."   The leaders of 
coalition parties in the Dutch parliament are now debating 
whether to go through with their planned visit in late 
August.  "There is little point in going if important 
persons don't want to speak to us for reasons of prestige," 
said one leader.  However, delegation leader and parliament 
president Frans Weisglas opined that the delegation should 
go "because we are going at the invitation of the Antillean 
parliament and not the government, and it would be unfair to 
leave them out in the cold.  Frictions with the government 
should not stop us from going." 
 
Sobel