This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000520 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TERREP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2010 
TAGS: PTER ASEC CASC YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN: HUNT OIL SHOOTINGS - MARCH 19 UPDATE 
 
REF: SANAA 511 
 
Classified By: AMB: EJHULL FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Following the March 18 shooting in Marib of four Hunt 
Oil employees (reftel), our consular section has been in 
touch with the family of deceased Amcit Ron Horsch in the 
U.S. and is assisting in arrangements for shipment of remains 
from Yemen tonight via Frankfurt.  Mark Edwards, the Canadian 
wounded in the shooting, had successful surgery in Sanaa and 
was medevaced from Yemen by air through arrangements made by 
Hunt. 
 
¶2. (C) Investigation of the shooting by Naji Ahmed Al-Kumaym 
is continuing.  Embassy team, including FBI local 
representative, an OSI investigator, and RSO staff have 
received information from Yemeni police sources and are 
presently at the Marib site where they will be examining the 
crime scene and interviewing eye witnesses and others in the 
coming hours before returning to Sanaa tonight. 
 
¶3.  (C) According to a Hunt Oil source, Al-Kumaym had been 
released as an employee by Nabors three times since 1992.  He 
is said to have had family problems, not to have been 
religiously observant or extremist, and reportedly was on 
medications, with medications having been found in his room. 
Yemeni police told our investigators that Al-Kumaym had been 
an employee of Nabors for seven years in good standing, as a 
carpenter, and that he was well known by Hunt employees 
including his victims.  The police added that Al-Kumaym had 
seen a doctor three days ago, and had been having sleeping 
problems and problems with his family; the police also said 
Al-Kumaym was not religious and was not known to speak of 
politics.  The police confirmed that the attack weapon was a 
handgun of Russian manufacture, not, as some press reports 
have said, an AK-47. 
 
¶4. (C) A Hunt official told us that operations in Yemen are 
under review in the light of regional circumstances, and that 
dependents are to be evacuated.  RSO is providing requested 
advice and assistance in obtaining metal detectors and 
security equipment. 
 
¶5.  (C) Comment:  Until investigators have interviewed 
witnesses at the site, it remains premature to reach any 
conclusion regarding possible motives behind these shootings. 
 We expect to know more by tomorrow. 
HULL