This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021008Z Sep 03C O N F I D E N T I A L KATHMANDU 001691 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, DS/IP/SA 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/03/2013 
TAGS: PGOV NP
SUBJECT: STUDENT UNION LEADERS ARRESTED DURING POLITICAL 
RALLY 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (SBU) From 1430 to 1600 on September 2, roughly 150 
students began demonstrating in Ratna Park in central 
Kathmandu to protest the Government of Nepal's "regressive 
actions" against the political parties.  The students 
represented the various student unions that are affiliated 
with the five major political parties.  (Note.  The 
demonstration had been announced in late August prior to the 
break in the cease-fire.  End Note.)  At the same time and 
place, Nepal Bar Association members gathered to protest the 
GON order of September 1 prohibiting all public 
demonstrations in the capital (reported septel). 
 
¶2. (SBU) Police sources report that approximately 16 student 
leaders were arrested and taken to Hanuman Dhoka prison for 
violating the GON prohibition on public demonstrations.  The 
Police also arrested roughly eight association members, 
including the president, Sindhunath Pyakurel.  Police and 
Royal Nepal Army soldiers dispersed the remaining 
demonstrators using batons, but no injuries have been 
reported.  Embassy contacts indicate that the Police have 
released ten of the students and will likely release the 
others after they pay fines.  The RNA is also maintaining a 
visible presence in Kathmandu using tanks and foot patrols. 
 
¶3. (C)  Comment.  The student union demonstration likely was 
carried out in smaller numbers than originally planned 
because of the GON order prohibiting such activity.  The five 
main political parties, who had scheduled a mass nation-wide 
demonstration for September 4, may use the student rally as a 
litmus test on whether they will continue with their planned 
demonstration.  Post anticipates that even if the political 
parties decide to move forward with the protest, their 
numbers will remain more modest than originally projected. 
End Comment. 
MALINOWSKI