This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000682 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP AND DRL 
USMISSION NEW YORK FOR AMBASSADOR TWINING 
CDR USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO BM ASSK NLD
SUBJECT: SPDC STRIKES CONCILIATORY TONE IN SECOND BRIEFING 
ON MAY 30 AMBUSH 
 
REF: RANGOON 0647 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  In a June 10 briefing for journalists and 
diplomats following UN Special Envoy Razali's departure from 
Rangoon, the Foreign Ministry provided more details of the 
May 30 ambush of Aung San Suu Kyi's (ASSK) motorcade near 
Depeyin and side-pedaled on several issues connected to the 
attack.  Deputy Foreign Minister Khin Maung Win announced 
that an official inquest by the Ministry of Home Affairs is 
underway and more details would be forthcoming.  The COM 
again requested a full accounting of the injured, dead and 
detained.  She also expressed the expectation that the SPDC 
would not merely return to the status quo ante May 30 but 
would take concrete steps forward on the path of national 
reconciliation. This briefing was unexpectedly conciliatory 
indicating that the government is on notice that the issue is 
bigger than access to ASSK and the NLD members - they must 
try to build some credibility, quickly, if they expect anyone 
to believe their "commitment to national reconciliation." 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  DeputyFonMin (DFM) Khin Maung Win reiterated that the 
SPDC regarded the events of May 30 as "most unfortunate" and 
that the "safe custody" measures for ASSK are temporary and 
will be lifted "as soon as the situation returns to normal." 
He said Special Envoy Razali was granted the "special 
gesture" of a meeting with ASSK for two reasons:  to show 
their continuing cooperation with the United Nations, and 
because of the SPDC's trust in confidence in Mr. Razali 
himself. 
 
¶3.  He announced that the Ministry of Home Affairs had opened 
an official inquest into the May 30 "incident."  Preliminary 
investigations show that violence erupted when ASSK's convoy 
attempted to "plow through a crowd blocking the road."  He 
made much out of the fact that this occurred late at night in 
"an area with no public lighting, there was much confusion, 
and things got out of hand."  (Note:  The government appears 
to be developing a new approach to describing the situation. 
Unlike the tone of certainty accompanying the statements of 
the last press briefing - "There were 5000 people gathered. 
...  There were no military or police present at the time of 
the attack. ...  Only fifty were injured. ... No arrests were 
made - the government is emphasizing uncertainty, the 
confusion and dark, and that the inquest is "ongoing" and 
more details may yet be uncovered.  It gives them more leeway 
to retract or contradict statements made earlier.  End Note.) 
 
¶4.  The DFM "clarified" several statements made at the June 3 
briefing (Reftel).  He was careful to say, instead of "50 
injured" that 48 people presented themselves at the hospital 
for treatment, leaving the possibility that there were more 
injured who did not.  In response to a question about 
arrests, he said that no one had been "arrested per se" but 
that, "as they say in the British newspapers, several people 
are helping us with our inquiries." 
 
¶5.  He reiterated that both Aung San Suu Kyi and Tin Oo were 
not hurt in what the SPDC is now calling "a melee" instead of 
an "incident." 
 
¶6.  Diplomats present reiterated their desire to have access 
to ASSK and Tin Oo.  The COM requested that the government 
provide a full accounting, including names of the dead and 
injured at the scene.  The DFM replied that he would try to 
comply.  She also expressed the expectation that SPDC would 
demonstrate their stated commitment to the national 
reconciliation process not merely by releasing ASSK and other 
detainees and reopening the NLD offices, but going forward 
with concrete steps to bring about national reconciliation. 
The DFM said he shared that sentiment, as "we do not want to 
return to confrontation." 
 
¶7.  Comment:  This briefing was unexpectedly conciliatory. 
However, the assembled dip corps expressed disappointment 
that the government continues to stonewall on the issue of 
access to ASSK and the NLD leadership, and on the issue of 
the conditions and location of their detention.  But it 
appears that the government is starting to realize that 
attacking and accusing the NLD of provoking the clash, or 
claiming an international smear campaign against the SPDC, 
won't wash. They are also on notice that the issue is bigger 
than access to ASSK and the NLD members - they must try to 
build some credibility, quickly, if they expect anyone to 
believe their "commitment to national reconciliation".  End 
Comment. 
Martinez