This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006442 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAR (MCISAAC) AND WHA/PPC (NORMAN) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KCRM SNAR AMGT DR
SUBJECT: 90-DAY GOALS MET IN 90 DAYS - SANTO DOMINGO 
 
REF: A. STATE 230096 
 
     ¶B. SANTO DOMINGO 04246 
     ¶C. STATE 304789 
     ¶D. SANTO DOMINGO 06379 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  Embassy Santo Domingo has met all three 
of its 90-day goals set forth in reftel B.  Emboffs have: a.) 
Increased the Dominican's readiness for CAFTA docking talks, 
b.) Secured GODR agreement for international election 
observers and identified potential observers, and c.) 
Convinced the GODR to take action against 
smugglers/traffickers or corrupt officials.  Embassy Santo 
Domingo will continue to work with GODR to make further 
progress in each of these areas. 
 
-------------------- 
CAFTA docking talks 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Emboffs worked with Dominican counterparts on two 
major areas relating to the upcoming CAFTA docking talks: a.) 
strengthening copyright regulations, and b.) identifying 
concerns and priorities as the Dominicans enter negotiations. 
 The GODR had issued a resolution that weakened enforcement 
provisions in copyright cases and conflicted with current 
Dominican piracy laws.  In late August, the GODR reversed the 
decision via a second resolution passed by the Secretariat of 
Culture, resulting in an overall strengthening of the 
administration of copyright laws in the country.  Emboffs 
also engaged on a frequent and regular basis with GODR 
officials on the CAFTA integration process and content to 
identify priorities and concerns.  The GODR has established 
its negotiating team and has launched its outreach process 
with Dominican interested parties to identify their key 
concerns. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Additional steps taken to increase GODR readiness 
for CAFTA docking talks include: USAID support in sponsoring 
upcoming training in rules of origin and international 
arbitration, and outreach to civil society and the private 
sector.  Training courses in international arbitration and 
rules of origin are scheduled to take place in November. 
Outreach to the private sector is an ongoing process. 
Emboffs are approaching all major chambers of commerce and on 
October 22, the DCM delivered a comprehensive speech on trade 
policy to an association of chambers in Santiago, the 
Dominican Republic's second largest city. 
 
---------------------------------- 
International Election Observers 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Emboffs met with various members of the Central 
Electoral Board (JCE), the GODR board which has the authority 
to ask for international election observers.  The JCE 
participated in a UNDP round-table with the EU and several 
donor countries, including the USG, and said that it would 
enthusiastically welcome international observers for the May 
2004, presidential elections.  The UNDP will sponsor a second 
round-table to discuss details and logistics.  Emboffs have 
confirmed that the NDI/Carter Center, the International 
Foundation for Election Systems (IFES) and the Centro de 
Asesoria y Promocion Electoral (CAPEL) are interested in 
serving as observers to the election if resources are 
available.  The Carter Center and IFES have proposed 
USG-funded missions, and the OAS is expected to submit a 
proposal as well.  Embassy Santo Domingo does not/not have 
resources to fund any of these proposals at this time. 
Embassy sent request for USG funding (reftel D). 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
GODR's action against smugglers or corrupt officials 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Ambassador and Emboffs have repeatedly urged 
the GODR to prosecute suspected alien smuggler and Dominican 
Congressman Guillermo Radhames Ramos Garcia.  The Ambassador 
discussed the case directly with President Mejia.  The DCM 
and Poloffs met with the Dominican Attorney General, the 
Chief of the Supreme Court, and the chief of the National 
Police, in October, in addition to raising the issue with 
lower level contacts throughout the past 90 days.  Ramos 
Garcia was apprehended attempting to bring East Asian 
migrants illegally into the Dominican Republic from Haiti. 
With much prodding from Embassy Santo Domingo, the Dominican 
Attorney General's office turned over to the Dominican 
Supreme Court the documents necessary for prosecution.  The 
Supreme Court has original jurisdiction over the case due to 
Ramos Garcia's position as a congressman.  The Supreme Court 
held two hearings on preliminary matters on October 22, and 
October 30.  Ramos Garcia's trial is currently scheduled to 
begin on December 4. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Additionally, the Ambassador, DCM, Consul General 
and other Emboffs provided to the Foreign Minister the names 
of a former Dominican vice consul in Panama, and a Panamanian 
consul in Santo Domingo, who have been implicated in 
trafficking Dominican women to Panama.  Emboffs have also 
requested the National Police and the Dominican Under 
Secretary of Foreign Relations for Consular Affairs to open 
 
SIPDIS 
an investigation against the Dominican consular officer. 
HERTELL