This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001788 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA DIBBLE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2011 
TAGS: PREL KPAO PINR YM DEMARCHE DEMOCRATIC REFORM
SUBJECT: MINISTER OF INFORMATION AL-AWADHI OPEN TO 
EXPANDING BROADCAST MEDIA AND INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISM IN 
YEMEN; NEUTRAL ON MORE BALANCED IRAQ REPORTING 
 
REF: A. (A) SANAA 1742 
 
     ¶B. (B) STATE 199008 
 
Classified By: Classified by: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, reasons 1.5(b 
and d) 
 
 ¶1. (c) Summary:  The Ambassador, PAO, and Pol/Econ Chief 
paid a courtesy call on Minister of Information Hussein 
Dhaifallah al-Awadhi on July 23 to congratulate him on his 
appointment and deliver the demarche points in reftel b. 
(Note:  Biographical information in paragraph 8.)  In 
addition to emphasizing the need for more balanced coverage 
of the situation in Iraq, the possibility of more broadcast 
options in Yemen, the need for increased freedom of the press 
and our mutual interest in expanding the International 
Visitor Program (IVP) for Yemeni journalists in an effort to 
promote more investigative journalism.  End comment. 
 
BALANCING IRAQ COVERAGE ) MOI ALREADY BEING CRITICIZED 
 
¶2. (c) After noting improvements in the security situation, 
the Ambassador said that it is time to consider serious 
economic reform, including a substantial reduction in 
corruption.  Citing both domestic and foreign investors 
interest in improvement, the Ambassador highlighted the need 
for an active and free media to expose corrupt practices.  He 
assured al-Awadhi that the U.S. is looking for ways to help 
Yemen develop a professional, responsible and well-trained 
media that will understand the privileges and 
responsibilities of a free press.  He criticized the Yemeni 
press for not acknowledging positive aspects of the removal 
of Saddam Hussein,s regime in Iraq, coalition efforts to 
help the Iraqi,s govern themselves and the establishment of 
the Governing Council.  The Ambassador suggested that the 
media should be more supportive of the &new8 versus the 
&old8 Iraq and firmly requested more balanced reporting. 
 
¶3. (c) The Minister said that the Parliament has criticized 
the Ministry of Information (MOI) for not controlling the 
papers enough, for example, by not designating coalition 
operations as the &U.S. occupation.8  He acknowledged that 
the problem is often a lack of information, and that the 
independent papers will attack both the official media and 
the Ministry.  When the Ambassador then asked if there was 
someone else he should speak with, al-Awadhi quickly said 
that he would call a meeting and point out U.S. concerns, but 
defended the Yemeni media by comparing it favorably to the 
Egyptian press.  He said that while Yemen did not support the 
Iraqi government, it has enjoyed a good relationship with the 
Iraqi people and would like to continue on positive terms. 
The Ambassador reiterated that both sides of the issues need 
to be presented, the U.S. is willing to accept criticism, but 
would also like credit when due -- e.g., formation of the 
Governing Council. 
 
RADIO SAWA ) ACCESS FOR ONE, MEANS ACCESS FOR ALL 
 
¶4. (c) Al-Awahdi said that a draft print media law is in the 
works and another law is being developed for broadcast media 
that would pave the way for other radio and television 
stations (note: The broadcast media is currently all 
government owned and controlled).  He expects to complete the 
draft in the next two months, and it will then need approval 
from both the Cabinet and Parliament.  He indicated that if 
it goes forward it would pave the way for the opposition 
party Islah to request radio and TV broadcasts.  Currently, 
the opposition intermittently broadcasts via short-wave from 
a mosque.  Responding to the Ambassador,s inquiry about 
allowing a transmitter for Radio Sawa, al-Awahdi expressed 
concern that if the ROYG gives permission for Sawa (or BBC or 
Monte Carlo, which have also made requests), Yemeni citizens 
would also be entitled to the same access.  He commented that 
Yemen is looking to its Arab neighbors for guidance and that 
Egypt has already started privatizing the media.  The 
Ambassador pointed out that Jordan and numerous Gulf states 
had licensed Radio Sawa. 
 
¶5. (c) The Minister said that the current focus is on 
rebuilding broadcast stations and upgrading technology.  The 
goal is to provide service to the entire country in contrast 
to the current 60 percent coverage.  He cited a new radio 
station in Hodeidah that is being built by a U.S. company at 
a cost of $1 million as well as a second project. 
 
PRESS FREEDOM ) A WORK IN PROGRESS 
 
¶6.  (u) While noting that the Yemeni President allows people 
to express their opinions, the Ambassador commented that 
pending court cases, intrusive investigations, and the 
detention of journalists inhibits investigative journalism. 
He said we would like to work with Yemen to promote freedom 
of the press and protections against the violation of 
journalists' rights.  Al-Awahdi said the MOI is working to 
have a provision that would send journalists to jail for 
certain acts stricken from the new draft print media law and 
that the Ministry is changing and trying to support the 
journalists union.  He further suggested that visitor 
exchanges (e.g., professors from journalism programs) as well 
as the continuation of the Humphrey and International Visitor 
Programs focused on young journalists would promote more 
investigative journalism, which Yemen,s print news currently 
lacks.  (Note: al-Awahdi offered to provide accommodation and 
in-country support for any visiting professor if the U.S. was 
willing to pay airfare). 
 
INTERNATIONAL VISITORS ) MORE WOMEN JOURNALISTS, PLEASE 
 
¶7. (u) The Ambassador passed a list of six journalists who 
will participate in IV programs between now and March 2004. 
Al-Awahdi noted the balance between official and independent 
papers with appreciation, but asked why there were no female 
journalists.  PAO said that inquiries to several women failed 
to produce any willing to travel without a male escort. 
Ministry officials promised to provide the names of 
potentially eligible female journalists able to travel alone. 
 The PAO,s request for biographical information on working 
Yemeni journalists was also favorably received. 
 
¶8. (u) Biographical note:  Born in 1958, Al-Awadhi is a 
graduate of the University of Maryland, a Humphrey fellow and 
went on a one month IVP about three years ago.  Previously a 
professor of Arab media at Sanaa University, he has been 
Minister since 2001 and was retained from the previous 
cabinet. 
HULL