This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 001425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, EB/ESC, DRL 
COMMERCE FOR ITA JEAN KELLY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/04/2013 
TAGS: ETRD KTEX ELAB PHUM PGOV BM
SUBJECT: BURMA SANCTIONS: GARMENT MAKERS CLING TO LEAKY RAFT 
 
REF: RANGOON 1358 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN MARTINEZ FOR REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Burma's private garment manufacturers claim 
100 closed factories and 50,000 jobless as of the end of 
October -- with another 25,000 likely out of work by year's 
end.  However, last-minute, limited garment orders from 
Europe will postpone the death of the Burmese garment 
industry into 2004.  As of yet, there's still no overwhelming 
evidence of large numbers of garment workers turning economic 
migrant or karaoke hostess.  However we will wait until 
severance packages and other opportunities dry up before 
making a firm assessment of the social cost of the garment 
sector's demise.  End summary. 
 
Burma's Garment Makers Emerge from Woodwork 
 
¶2. (C) Citing increased attention from military intelligence, 
Burmese owners of private garment factories have refused to 
meet us since the implementation of the U.S. import ban in 
late August.  This import ban cut off the industry's primary 
market for clothing -- worth around US$ 70 million to the 
Burmese economy in 2002.  However, we were able to sit down 
on November 5th with a representative of one of the largest 
private firms, a regular and reliable pre-sanctions contact 
of the Embassy's, to hear the Burmese view of the state of 
affairs in the garment sector.  Several Korean investors in 
the garment sector recently aired their grievances to us as 
reported in reftel. 
 
¶3. (C) The Burmese factory owner told us that an unexpected 
20 percent rise in orders from Europe (due to the Euro 2004 
soccer tournament), had softened the landing for his factory, 
and those of his colleagues.  Nonetheless, he had already 
closed two of his seven factories, with a loss of 1,000 jobs, 
and will close another this month -- 500 more jobs.  Through 
the end of October, the loosely organized Burmese garment 
manufacturers' association reported 100 factories closed with 
a loss of about 50,000 jobs.  He commented that the damage 
was almost done, predicting another 50 factories and 25,000 
jobs lost in the next two months before capacity and demand 
returned to equilibrium.  He feared, though, that there would 
be another round of closures in 2004, when the limited Euro 
2004 orders dried up. 
 
The Mystery of the Laid-Off Garment Worker 
 
¶4. (C) Our contact agreed with his Korean colleagues' 
assessment that few laid-off workers (nearly all young women) 
had thus far sought refuge in the entertainment industry or 
headed for the Thai border.  Instead, he thought, most had 
unsucessfully sought work in other stricken garment houses, 
before heading back to the fields of their home villages. 
However, he warned that it was really too early to make any 
firm statements on the ultimate fate of these people.  By 
law, factory owners are required to give each laid-off 
employee a three-month severance package.  When these 
packages start to dry up, in a month or two, the economic 
situation for these unemployed, and their families, could 
become dire.  He would not speculate on the ultimate 
destination for his ex-workers.  He said that the 
entertainment industry was "not for everybody," however, he 
also asserted that employment opportunities for young women 
are extremely limited. 
 
¶5. (C) What is clear for now is that the government will 
offer little assistance.  Adopting the attitude it has relied 
upon when faced by troubled traders and bankers, the Minister 
of Industry (1) told a group of the largest local garment 
factory owners that they should surivive "the best you can on 
your own."  When pressed, the Minister offered that 
government factories might be able to temporarily hire 5-10 
percent of the unemployed garment workers, but at a wage far 
lower than in the private factories.  (Government wages 
across the board are pitiful, with a civil servant at the top 
of the wage scale earning 10,000 kyat (about US$11 at current 
rates) per month.  Private garment factories usually offer 
around the equivalent of US$15-$20 per month, or more, plus 
overtime.) 
Grim Future, But Details Aren't Clear 
¶6. (C) From our observations and recent discussions with 
garment manufacturers, NGOs, and other businesspeople 
(including some potential hirers of ex-workers) we reach two 
conclusions: (1) U.S. sanctions are expediting the death of 
an already sickly garment sector and new orders from Europe, 
or elsewhere, will not arrive to save the day; and, (2) it's 
too early to make absolutly definitive assertions on the fate 
of all of the 50,000-100,000 workers who have already lost, 
or who will likely lose, their garment jobs.  No one claims 
that there are revolving doors between the garment factories 
and the Thai border, or the restaurants, karaoke lounges, 
massage parlors, and discos of Burma's cities.  However, with 
few other economic opportunities for young women available, 
there remains a real fear that some of those who lose their 
garment jobs will find their way into the country's 
entertainment sector. 
Martinez