This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

121134Z Dec 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 002132 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/12/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM NI
SUBJECT: BUHARI TRIAL ADJOURNED UNTIL JANUARY 19 
 
REF: A. ABUJA 2029 
 
     ¶B. ABUJA 1872 AND PREVIOUS 
 
CLASSIFIED BY COUNSELOR JAMES MAXSTADT FOR REASON 1.5 D. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) :  The ANPP/Buhari suit continues at its slow pace. 
The complainant ANPP continues to score points with its 
evidence, and the defense (Obasanjo) attempts to delay the 
process through objections to virtually every witness and 
document.  The "Independent" National Electoral Commission 
(INEC) attorney has resumed following the lead of PDP 
President Obasanjo,s defense attorney, Afe Babalola. 
Testimony continued on the election in Imo and Kaduna states, 
and the complainant also told the judges that the State 
Security Service (SSS) and police are harassing its witnesses 
after they testify. 
 
¶2. (SBU) With the justices attending the annual Nigerian 
judiciary conference, the case has been adjourned until 
January 19, 2004.  Buhari and ANPP Chairman Don Etiebet still 
plan to visit the U.S. to highlight the continuing 
instability and insecurity in Nigeria.  The two remain 
concerned about the effect that perceived "USG backing of 
rigged elections" might have on future U.S.-Nigeria relations 
and on Nigerian public opinion.  They plan to visit 
Washington after the Christmas holidays, when the U.S. 
Congress is back in session.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
EVIDENCE OF ELECTION TAMPERING 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU)  The ANPP/Buhari suit continues slowly at the Court 
of Appeals, with the prosecution methodically presenting 
evidence of INEC,s failures and the complicity of 
Obasanjo/PDP and the security services in controlling the 
outcome of the 2003 elections.  Witnesses presented new 
evidence about hijacked ballot boxes in many areas of Kaduna 
state, and claimed that known PDP supporters then conspired 
with police to change the results.  Two more victims of 
police shootings on elections day also testified. 
 
¶4. (SBU) A copy of a letter from Imo State Regional Elections 
Commissioner Alhaji Garba Bawa, presented to the court by 
ANPP Imo State Chairman Dr. Edmond Onyewuchi, seemed to 
confirm that massive irregularities took place in Imo.  The 
letter corroborated Bawa,s April 28 comments at a press 
conference that "INEC ad hoc staff compromised the election." 
 Obasanjo defense lawyer Babalola objected to the use of a 
copy as evidence.  After recessing, the justices allowed the 
copy to be admitted, on the principle that a party to the 
suit (defendant INEC) might not produce the original in its 
possession, even when subpoenaed.  (NOTE:  INEC so far has 
not produced in court various other subpoenaed documents, 
including the National Voters Register that was required by 
law before a legal election could take place.  End Note.) 
Witnesses from both Imo and Kaduna states added further 
testimony that INEC did not allow ANPP party agents to 
inspect and certify election materials before distribution to 
polling sites, as required by INEC,s own electoral 
guidelines. 
 
----------------------- 
HARASSMENT OF WITNESSES 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Many witnesses for the complainant have been 
questioned by police and SSS following their testimony.  ANPP 
Adamawa State Gubernatorial candidate Alhaji Mu,azu Modibbo 
was detained for several days in October and has been 
subjected to surveillance since.  ANPP Imo State Chairman 
Onyewuchi was also detained on his return to Owerri from the 
court in Abuja, and interrogated by SSS.  Many others have 
reported being followed or otherwise harassed in Ogun, 
Adamawa, Kaduna and Imo states, the four states presented 
thus far in the proceedings.  The witnesses detained were 
later released without charges after spending varying amounts 
of time in custody. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Buhari's lawyer complained to the judges about the 
harassment by the security services.  Obasanjo attorney 
Babalola denied any presidential knowledge of the harassment, 
and urged the judges not to permit the issue to become part 
of the election suit proceedings.  Head Justice Umaru 
Abdullahi told Buhari's lawyers that they were responsibility 
for protecting their witnesses.  The press weighed in on the 
issue, pointing out that it was more logical for the 
government to control its overzealous security services than 
to ask opposition parties to take that task. 
 
------------------------------- 
BUHARI/ETIEBET TRIP TO THE U.S. 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) With the justices attending Nigeria's annual judiciary 
conference, the case has been adjourned until January 19, 
¶2004.  ANPP candidate Buhari and ANPP Chairman Don Etiebet 
plan to visit the U.S. (Ref A) to present their case against 
the election results and highlight the continuing instability 
and insecurity in Nigeria.  While they are not happy about 
missing resumption of the trial, they say they are more 
concerned at what they see as "the USG,s apparent backing of 
the rigged elections," and the effect such perceived backing 
might have on future U.S.-Nigeria relations.  Their current 
plan is to try to visit the U.S. after the Christmas 
holidays, when Congress is back in session.  While Buhari's 
presence in the courtroom is useful for public relations, 
they think it should not supersede other, more important 
activities that Buhari might undertake. 
 
¶8. (C) COMMENT: As long as Buhari sticks to the judicial 
process, the likelihood of public disturbances in the north 
against Obasanjo is diminished, although not eliminated. 
Without a spark from another region, mass action is unlikely 
to commence until after all legal means have been exhausted. 
On the other hand, the longer Obasanjo keeps the process 
going, the more potent his lawyer's argument becomes that it 
is too late for the court to annul the April 2003 election 
(Ref B).  While other factors -- such as the internal strife 
in the PDP and the continued anger among Nigerians on many 
issues -- could trigger nationwide demonstrations or even an 
in-house coup attempt by elements of the current ruling 
party, any such event also remains unlikely before the 
Appeals Court (and if it goes that far, the Supreme Court) 
announces its decision. 
MEECE