This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 003621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR IT PREL EUN
SUBJECT: SUBJECT: ITALY'S EU PRESIDENCY: CIVIL AVIATION 
ISSUES; LEADERSHIP CHANGE AT ENAC 
 
REF: ROME 02837 
 
 ¶1. (U) Summary.  Dr. Aldo Sansone, Transport and 
Infrastructure Ministry Director General for International 
Affairs, emphasized to Embassy officers that Italy's EU 
Presidential role will moderate the government's handling of 
civil aviation issues, including Open Skies (OS), Single 
European Sky (SES), and Denied Boarding Compensation (DBC). 
Sansone also discussed the change in leadership at the 
National Civil Aviation Entity (ENAC).  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Participants: Rome Embassy officers FAA Senior 
Representative Gregory Joyner, Economic Officer Theresa 
Canavan, and Economic Specialist Ebe Marzetti,; Dr. Aldo 
Sansone, Transport and Infrastructure Ministry Director 
General for International Affairs and Ezio Maddalon, 
Transport and Infrastructure Ministry Director General for 
Navigation. 
 
------------------------- 
ITALY'S ROLE AS PRESIDENT 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Dr. Aldo Sansone, Transport and Infrastructure 
Ministry Director General for International Affairs, 
repeatedly stressed to Emboffs that &Italy may have to 
sacrifice its national interests in favor of a solution8 on 
issues such as the SES and DBC, which must both undergo the 
process of conciliation between the Council and Parliament to 
resolve differences.  Sansone stressed that for Italy in its 
role as EU President, the government intends to avoid taking 
a rigid stance during any negotiations where, as a member 
state, it has interests at stake.  Sansone characterized 
Italy's role as one of a mediator, not an interested party. 
 
¶3. (U) Sansone stated that Italy would be active in three 
different capacities: first, facilitating conciliation on 
both SES and DBC issues; second, monitoring and observing the 
progress of US-EU talks, and third, facilitating the adoption 
of draft regulations.  Sansone underlined that in its EU 
Presidency, Italy's aim is to ease EU operations at both 
internal and international levels. 
 
¶4. (U) The EU is working on an insurance proposal, which 
would establish a framework of insurance regulations to 
provide a minimum level of insurance for airlines and private 
owners of aircraft.  (Comment:  The ICAO Convention covers 
liability; this proposal would require insurance coverage.) 
Sansone assessed that agreement is likely to be reached on 
the insurance proposal in the fall. 
 
---------- 
OPEN SKIES 
---------- 
 
¶5. (U) Sansone emphasized that Italy's role in negotiating a 
U.S./EU Open Skies agreement would be minimal because of the 
European Commission's mandate to negotiate on behalf of the 
EU member states.  Italy, in its EU Presidency, would verify 
that the talks remain in line with the negotiating mandate. 
 
------------- 
THIRD PACKAGE 
------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Sansone noted that there would probably not be time to 
consider Third Package issues during the Italian EU 
Presidency.  The Commission sent questionnaires at the end of 
June.  By the time responses are collected and reviewed, it 
will be autumn, so the Commission would not make a proposal 
before November. 
 
---- 
ENAC 
---- 
 
¶7. (U) On July 11 the Italian Council of Ministers agreed to 
nominate Prof. Vito Riggio, special commissioner of ENAC, to 
immediately replace Dr. Alfredo Roma as chairman of ENAC. 
Riggio's candidacy has been strongly supported by the 
Minister of Transport and Navigation, Pierluigi Bersani. 
Riggio is managing ENAC in his capacity as Special 
Commissioner until the bureaucratic process required for his 
appointment as chairman is complete. 
 
¶8. (U) Sansone noted that the position of Director General of 
ENAC, presently held by Dr. Pierluigi Di Palma, would also be 
 
 
subject to change.  Di Palma will be replaced and his 
position likely taken by Com. Silvano Manera, formerly 
responsible for flight safety at Alitalia.  Di Palma is due 
to run a new office that will open on October 1 and which is 
responsible for coordinating ENAV (National Entity for Flight 
Assistance) and ENAC within the EU.  The office will be 
located in Rome and Brussels. 
Sembler 
 
 
NNNN 
 2003ROME03621 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED