This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005313 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, NEA, AND PM; OSD FOR NSC FOR BRYZA. JCS 
FOR J5 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: CODEL MURTHA STRESSES IMPORTANCE OF US-TURKISH 
RELATIONSHIP; PRESSES FOR TURKISH INVOLVEMENT IN 
STABILIZATION AND RECONSTRUCTION EFFORTS IN IRAQ 
 
 
(U) Classified by Deputy Chief of Mission Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons:  1.5 (B and D). 
 
 
(U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (C) Visiting Congressmen Murtha and Larson assured 
Minister of Defense Gonul and TGS CHOD Gen Ozkok August 19 
that Turkey was one of the USG's best allies and that we were 
looking to Turkey to contribute to reconstruction and 
stabilization efforts in Iraq.  Gonul and Ozkok said Turkey 
shared our interests in Iraq and argued that reconstruction 
was key to creating stability and security there.  Gonul said 
the Turkish government was in principle ready to help on the 
stabilization force and commented that compared to March 1, 
the government and AK had enough power in Parliament where it 
will be easier to make the right decision.  Ozkok confirmed 
that TGS had received the USG's responses to its questions 
and said the Turkish military would be prepared to begin 
"phase one" mil-to-mil talks soon.  Once TGS completed its 
evaluation, it would make its views known to the GOT.  The 
GOT would then make a decision and take it to Parliament. 
Both Gonul and Ozkok welcomed the CODEL's reaffirmation of 
USG's intent to fight terrorism globally, including the 
PKK/Kadek.  Gonul and Ozkok argued that progress in Iraq 
would lead to progress in the greater Middle East and 
vice-a-versa.  Gonul reaffirmed general support for the 
Middle East roadmap and agreed it was in Turkey's interest to 
work for a peaceful solution.  End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Representatives Murtha and Larson, accompanied by 
staff members and the DCM, called on Minister of Defense 
Gonul and Turkish General Staff (TGS) CHOD General Ozkok. 
ODC Chief and A/Pol-Mil section chief also attended. 
 
 
----------------------------- 
TURKEY REMAINS A VALUED ALLY 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Rep. Murtha opened by stressing that Turkey was one of 
the USG's best allies.  In his 28 years in Congress, Murtha 
said there had been no better ally and stronger supporter of 
US interests than Turkey.  The perception that Turkey was no 
longer a key US Ally was not true -- especially not in 
Congress -- where there is a strong awareness and 
appreciation for the positive role that Turkey is playing 
globally.  Minister of Defense Gonul agreed on the importance 
of the US-Turkish relationship and said the two countries had 
shared the same destiny for many years.  CHOD Ozkok observed 
that relations between the US and Turkey were deep-rooted and 
dated back to the Korean War.  Turkey and US had continued 
this close degree of cooperation in Bosnia, Kosovo, 
Afghanistan and Iraq.  On Iraq, Ozkok stressed that Turkey 
"obviously supported" the US and cited a number of examples 
to illustrate the point: opening Turkish airspace to US 
aircraft (including TLAMs), support for counter-terrorism 
initiatives and providing military evacuation capabilities 
for US soldiers in southeastern Turkey.  Ozkok characterized 
Parliament's March 1 rejection of a motion to allow US troops 
to use Turkish soil to deploy to Iraq as a "peculiarity of 
the Turkish system," since a majority of parliamentarians had 
voted in favor of the motion.  Ozkok argued that the use of 
Turkish soil was only one area of cooperation. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
IRAQ:  US NEEDS SUPPORT, ASSISTANCE FROM ALLIES LIKE TURKEY 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Murtha told Gonul and Ozkok that he had just returned 
from Iraq, where he had met with OCPA Amb Bremer and assessed 
the current situation on the ground.  Murtha said that in his 
view, the USG had not been aware of the degree to which 
Saddam Hussein had let Iraq's infrastructure deteriorate. 
Murtha highlighted the electricity shortage and high level of 
unemployment as two of the key areas that needed addressing. 
He estimated that Iraq would face an annual shortfall of 
approximately $18B between its GDP ($35B) and what it was 
expected to take in from oil revenues and assistance from the 
US.  Amb Bremer and the Iraqi leaders have made great 
progress thus far in a number of areas, but a lot remains to 
be done.  While noting that the reconstruction and 
stabilization of Iraq was a monumental task that would take 
years to finalize and cost the US considerable a sum of 
money, the US was committed for the long haul and would 
succeed.  Rep. Larson added that Congress was united in its 
support for the Administration's efforts to bring about 
stability in Iraq.  Stability for Iraq translates into 
stability for the US, Turkey and the region.  Larson added 
that addressing the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people 
and developing stronger ties with its neighbors were key to 
establishing a stable and secure Iraq. 
 
 
¶5. (C) While stressing that the US would remain in Iraq as 
long as it takes to succeed, Murtha and Larson argued that 
cooperation from key allies like Turkey would be essential to 
quicken the pace of success.  Murtha said Turkey was in a 
natural position to contribute militarily in terms of troops 
and economically in terms of reconstruction assistance. 
Murtha said that in his recent discussions with Amb Bremer in 
Iraq, Bremer had said that the US was prepared to support a 
number of Turkey's economic and reconstruction proposals. 
Both Gonul and Ozkok highlighted the experience and past 
track record of Turkish construction and oil refinery firms 
beyond Turkey's borders, including most recently in 
Afghanistan. 
 
 
--------------------------------------- 
STRONG STABLE IRAQ IN TURKEY'S INTEREST 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Gonul and Ozkok said that a strong and stable Iraq was 
also in Turkey's national interest.  Gonul agreed that Saddam 
Hussein did not utilize the wealth of Iraqi resources -- 
including some of the most intelligent people in all of the 
Arab world -- to develop the country.  Saddam tended to focus 
all of Iraq's resources on enriching those close to him in 
the center of the country at the expense of the north and the 
south.  As a result, after 1991, there were three different 
somewhat independent regions (the north, south and center) 
and a number of different tribes vying for power.  In the 
north, tribes under the control of KDP and PUK took rather 
harsh measures against long-time resident Turkoman.  On 
cooperating with the US, Gonul said despite the outcome of 
the March 1 Parliamentary vote, there is not a single person 
in Turkey who sympathizes with Saddam.  The US always has 
supported Turkey and Turkey in turn wants to help the US 
succeed in Iraq.  Iraq and the Iraqi people are also Turkey's 
neighbors, and there are families in Turkey with family 
members in Iraq. 
 
 
¶7. (C) Ozkok said that a secure Iraq will help pave the way 
for the reconstruction of Iraq.  He noted that the future of 
Iraq was also important for Turkey.  First, Iraq was Turkey's 
neighbor.  Second, Turkey and Iraq shared a long history. 
Third, a strong, stable Iraq whose territorial integrity 
remains intact will help ensure a stable peaceful Turkey. 
Ozkok said that Turkey remained committed to ensuring that an 
independent Kuridsh state did not emerge in the north.  At 
the same time, because the majority of Kurds are Sunnis, it 
was important that all of the Kurds not leave Iraq to ensure 
against the emergence of a Shia-dominated Iraq.  Ozkok also 
argued that developments in Iraq will affect developments in 
other countries in the region.  While recognizing the 
difficulties of establishing democracy in some countries, 
Ozkok said the security of Turkey is very much dependent upon 
the democratic nature of the governments in the region. 
Turkey will continue to work with the US in this area. 
 
 
------------------- 
STABILIZATION FORCE 
------------------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) Murtha said the US hoped that Turkey could contribute 
forces to Iraq to assist in stabilization efforts there.  In 
order for us to get it right, Turkey needs to be with us. 
Without assistance from our allies and an "international 
face" on the stabilization force, the US will not succeed 
quickly.  Gonul said that in principle, the Turkish 
government is prepared to help, but the Turkish people have a 
number of questions: how long will Turkish troops be deployed 
in Iraq?  What will be their mission?  With the PKK/Kadek 
controlling parts of the north, how will Turkey be able to 
supply its forces in Iraq?  Gonul concluded by saying that 
"this time" (as opposed to March 1), the government is no 
longer new and the AK Party has enough power in Parliament 
where it will be easier to make the right decision.  Ozkok 
said that given the importance of a stable Iraq, Turkey will 
carefully form its views on whether to contribute to the 
stabilization force in Iraq.  In order for Turkey to make the 
political decision, TGS sought clarification from the US on a 
number of issues related to the stabilization force.  Ozkok 
said TGS recently had received the US responses and was in 
the process of studying them.  Ozkok said that the Turkish 
military would be prepared to begin "phase one" mil-to-mil 
planning discussions with the US "soon."  At the end of its 
evaluation process, the Turkish military would advise the 
government of its position.  Once the government reached a 
position, it would present it to Parliament.  Murtha said the 
more Turkey can contribute to stabilization efforts in Iraq 
and the more Turkey advises the US, the greater the prospects 
for success.  Ozkok added that while Turkey may not have the 
most updated intelligence on events in Iraq, it does possess 
a strong understanding of the Iraqi people, a factor that 
could be of assistance to the US. 
 
 
--------- 
PKK/Kadek 
--------- 
 
 
¶9. (C) Reps. Murtha and Larson reaffirmed the USG's general 
commitment to fighting terrorism globally and specific 
commitment to ridding Iraq of all terrorist elements, 
including the PKK/Kadek.  Murtha noted that the USG 
considered PKK/Kadek a terrorist organization and said the 
USG would continue to work with Turkey on this issue as long 
as it takes.  The DCM added the USG remains committed to 
eliminating the PKK/Kadek safe haven in Iraq.  Gonul welcomed 
the commitment and said Turkey had recently passed a 
re-integration law aimed at persuading PKK/Kadek members to 
lay down their weapons and return to Turkey voluntarily. 
 
 
------------------- 
MIDDLE EAST ROADMAP 
------------------- 
 
 
¶10. (C) Gonul and Ozkok argued that progress in Iraq would 
lead to progress in the greater Middle East and vice-a-versa. 
 Gonul said that if you stop terrorism in Palestinian 
territories, it will help stop violence in Iraq.  Murtha said 
that while this was a tough issue, he believed there was a 
glimmer of hope that progress could be made.  The USG 
continued to look to Turkey to use its good relations with 
both sides to push for implementation of the roadmap.  Gonul 
agreed that Turkey has good ties with Israel, including more 
than 20 defense-related projects in the works, and stressed 
that it was in Turkey's interest that both sides work for a 
peaceful solution. 
 
 
¶11. (U) Congressmen Murtha and Larson were unable to clear on 
this message before they departed post. 
EDELMAN