This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 004348 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS EAID JO
SUBJECT:  Creating Gender Sensitive ICT Synergies 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: UNIFEM (United Nations Development Fund for 
Women) plans to launch an "E-Village" project that will 
integrate a number of information and communications 
technologies (ICT) efforts underway in Jordan with the 
construction of a computer assembly plant in a village near 
Madaba.  Deema Bibi, UNIFEM ICT program manager for the 
Arab Region, told EconOff the project's three main 
objectives were training, economic opportunities, and 
raising gender awareness.  The E-Village will form an ICT 
hub that incorporates gender-sensitive strategies into 
various ICT initiatives.  UNIFEM is in the final stages of 
completing its project plan and hopes to secure the 
necessary sponsorships and commitments by Fall 2003.  END 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) The E-Village project will offer a series of 
different training programs to increase the capacity and 
professional skills of village residents.  The Ministry of 
Education will pilot the E-Learning initiative in E-Village 
schools.  In conjunction with their current programs, 
NetCorps and Microsoft plan to offer IT training and career 
development workshops.  UNIFEM also hopes to create an ICT 
incubator where citizens receive professional support to 
transform their ideas into software/IT programs. 
 
¶3. (U) In addition to training, UNIFEM is working with the 
GOJ, the private sector, and the local IT association, 
Intaj, to provide economic opportunities to the village. 
American-based Polywell has agreed to set up a computer 
assembly plant in the E-Village where villagers can apply 
newly learned skills.  Intaj plans to assist in the 
construction of an E-Services center where program 
graduates can work on national ICT initiatives.  UNIFEM 
also hopes to construct a career counseling and job 
placement center. 
 
¶4. (U) The final objective of the project is to raise 
awareness of the importance of both ICT in development and 
of involving women in the development process.  UNIFEM is 
working with its partners to ensure that its ICT strategies 
in the E-Village specifically target gender inequities. 
UNIFEM will also use the E-Village to host policy advocacy 
activities to support mainstreaming women into ICT. 
 
¶5.  (U) COMMENT:  While many ICT projects in the region 
address gender discrepancies in their strategies, the E- 
Village's promotion of gender awareness as a central tenet 
of the initiative is unique.  END COMMENT 
GNEHM