This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 005890 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ETRD EINV JO
SUBJECT: TRAVEL TO IRAQ FROM JORDAN: NEW HACC CHARTER 
FLIGHT ADDS OPTION 
 
REF: AMMAN 4535 
 
¶1. (U) Post has received multiple inquiries about travel to 
Iraq by way of Jordan, and is in planning stages for the 
creation of a logistics center to assist USG personnel 
transiting Jordan en route to Iraq.  As this logistics center 
is not yet operational, the Embassy wishes to supply he 
Department and all other interested USG personnel with 
information on current options for travel from Jordan to 
Iraq.  In the future, the Embassy plans to send out regular 
updates of this information giving any significant changes in 
travel options.  Particularly notable changes of the past two 
weeks include a cutback of UN flights to Iraq and the 
establishment of a regular Amman-Baghdad charter flight 
intended primarily for U.S., CPA, and Iraqi personnel. 
 
------------- 
AIR TRANSPORT 
------------- 
 
¶2. (U) There are currently three different ways to travel 
from Amman to Baghdad by air.  All three leave from Marka 
Airport, located in downtown Amman, about 25 miles from Queen 
Alia International Airport.  One began service recently, 
while two others have been established since the beginning of 
the summer (see reftel).  The Humanitarian Assistance 
Coordination Center (HACC) in Amman, in partnership with 
Royal Jordanian Airlines initiated a charter flight from 
Amman to Baghdad on August 18.  A 48-seat airplane departs 
Marka Airport at 0800 and arrives in Baghdad at 1100 on 
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.  Return flights depart 
Baghdad at 1230 and arrive in Amman by 1400 on those same 
days.  This flight is available for two categories of 
travelers. DOD and CPA personnel, personnel of the U.S. and 
coalition governments, and officials of Iraqi ministries will 
be charged USD 50 one-way and USD 100 round-trip.  Authorized 
USAID, CPA, and DOD contractors, personnel from the UN and 
humanitarian organizations, and non-coalition diplomats will 
be charged USD 350 one-way and USD 600 round-trip for the 
flight.  Passengers are limited to 20 kilos of baggage and 
will be charged USD 5 per kilo for excess baggage.  In 
Baghdad, CusterBattles offers a land transport service in 
conjunction with flight arrival and departure times that runs 
between the airport, the Republican Palace, the Palestine and 
Sheraton hotels, and the IAC/Al-Rasheed.  Travelers may 
register for this flight from Amman or get more information 
about it by contacting LTC Chuck Litzleman of HACC-Amman at 
962-77-485-998 or by e-mail at ChuckLitz@hotmail.com.  Upon 
approval by HACC, or with valid identification certifying 
membership in one of the above categories of authorized 
travelers,passengers will purchase tickets for a flight 
directly from Royal Jordanian Airlines. 
 
¶3. (U) A second air option is offered by the USAID grantee 
AirServ, which is operating 14-seat aircraft into Baghdad 
twice a day on Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday, and once a 
day on Tuesday.  Flights from Amman on Sunday and Wednesday 
also fly to Erbil, and 
on Monday and Thursday also fly to Basra.  (This schedule 
will be valid throughout September.) USAID personnel fly free 
of charge on this flight.  Personnel of USAID implementing 
partners and unaffiliated humanitarian NGOs are charged USD 
165 for a one-way ticket to Baghdad, with extra charges to 
continue to Basra and Erbil.  USG personnel other than USAID, 
personnel of foreign governments, and members of other 
organizations and corporations not affiliated with USAID may 
use these flights if space is available, and are charged USD 
660 for a one-way ticket to Baghdad, with extra charges for 
Basra and Erbil.  Passengers may carry no more than 20 kilos 
of luggage; excess baggage will be carried at an additional 
charge if there is room.  In Baghdad, AirServ does not offer 
ground transportation from the airport; passengers will need 
to make their own arrangements for such transportation. 
Persons wishing to register for this flight, obtain a full 
flight schedule, or find out further information may do so by 
contacting the AirServ booking office at 962-79-694-1365 or 
by e-mail at Jordan@airserv.org 
 
¶4. (U) UN Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) flights are a 
third option for air transport from Amman to Baghdad.  The UN 
is currently operating four aircraft flying at different 
times between Amman and Baghdad, as well as to other 
destinations in Iraq and in neighboring countries.  According 
to the current flight schedule, there is at least one flight 
a day from Amman to Baghdad and back from Sunday to Thursday, 
with frequent additional stops in Erbil, and occasionally an 
additional stop in Basra.   The recent drawdown of UN 
personnel in Iraq has meant that the schedule is subject to 
change on a day-to-day basis, depending upon the needs of the 
UN.  It also likely will mean a substantial decrease in 
flights into Iraq in the near future, after the last of the 
UN staff evacuations have been completed.  Current schedules 
may be obtained by contacting UNHAS at 962-79-666-9947 or by 
e-mail at rabie.allouh@wfp.org.  Seats on the UN flight are 
available free of charge to two tiers of passengers, with UN 
personnel given priority.  If space is available, members of 
humanitarian NGOs operating in support of the UN mission to 
Iraq and high-level (First Secretary and above) diplomatic 
personnel on official travel related to humanitarian work in 
Iraq may also use the aircraft free of charge, on a 
first-come, first-served basis.  If space remains after these 
two categories of passengers have been fully served, other 
governmental personnel may be able to obtain seats on the 
flight subject if clearance is granted from the office of the 
UN Humanitarian Coordinator in Iraq.  Passengers are limited 
to a maximum of 25 kilos of luggage, although this amount may 
be limited even further, based on the needs of the UN.  In 
Baghdad, the UN is offering land transport between the 
airport and the Canal Hotel, timed with the arrival and 
departure schedule.  Passengers for UNHAS flights cannot 
register by telephone; booking requests must be placed by 
e-mail to iraq.unhas@wfp.org.  Further information on UNHAS 
booking procedures, regulations, and points of contact may 
obtained at www.unjlc.org 
 
-------------- 
LAND TRANSPORT 
-------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Personnel unable to obtain seating on one of the three 
flights may wish to travel overland to Baghdad, although the 
Embassy does not repeat not recommend this route.  The drive 
from Amman to Baghdad is approximately nine hours during 
daylight. Jordanian taxis may be chartered from Amman to 
Baghdad, usually for a fee of USD 300-500.  These services 
include Abu Al Hal, telephone 962-6-462-1642, and Al Nasser, 
telephone 962-6-463-6952.  Armed escorts may be hired in 
Amman from security firms for an additional USD 1000-1500. 
There have been few/no attacks on vehicle traffic along this 
route (Iraqi Highway 1) between the Jordanian border and the 
Iraqi town of Ar-Rutba.  From Ar-Rutba to Baghdad (and 
especially between Ramadi and Baghdad), HWY 1 is subject to 
strong USG and UN travel advisories, as vehicles up to and 
including armored convoys have been attacked both at night 
and during daylight hours.  As the frequency of armed attacks 
is lowest during the morning daylight hours, taxi services 
tend to depart at around midnight from Amman in order to 
arrive at the highest-risk area during those hours. CPA 
Ministry of Interior has several active and passive efforts 
underway to combat threats to travelers in this area. 
 
----------------------------- 
OTHER LOGISTICAL REQUIREMENTS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) There are no visa requirements for entry into Iraq; 
travelers to Iraq crossing the land border must pay a fee 
equivalent to approx. 40 US cents.  Jordanian compliance with 
CPA Order 16 (signed June 27, 2003) requesting that foreign 
governments honor expired Iraqi passports less than four 
years out of date, has been spotty.  Jordan does not require 
visas for Iraqi passport holders; however, it has turned away 
many Iraqis at the port of entry.  Jordan does require visas 
for US and EU passport holders, which may be purchased for JD 
18/USD 25 upon arrival in Jordan.  USG employees are reminded 
to consult the Foreign Visitors Guide for information on 
official notification procedures for traveling to Jordan. 
GNEHM