This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ISTANBUL 001703 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/15/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL ASEC TU
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL SYNAGOGUES BOMBED 
 
Classified By: Consul General David Arnett for Reasons 1.5 (b & d) 
 
 
¶1. (u) Bombs detonated simultaneously at two of the major 
Jewish synagogues in Istanbul at approximately 9:30 am have 
claimed dozens of lives and injured over a hundred people. 
Based on observations by the Consul General, RSO, and poloffs 
at both sites, it appears that both buildings were targeted 
by vehicle bombs.  Damage was extensive, cars on the streets 
were destroyed, storefronts ruined, and glass windows 
shattered blocks away.  Consulate employees felt the shock 
from one of the explosions at their residence about a 
kilometer and a half away.  Early reports indicate that at 
least 23 people have been killed and over a hundred wounded, 
although it is likely that the numbers will continue to rise. 
 
 
¶2. (u) One of the sites was the Sisli Beth Israel synagogue, 
one of the community's most active.  The Chief Rabbi, the 
President of the Jewish Community, and 60 other dignitaries 
were at the site when the explosion occurred for a ceremony 
to commemorate the completion of a restoration project. 
Members of the Jewish Community Board who were also at the 
site reported to us that the Chief Rabbi and the President of 
the Community escaped unharmed, but at least a dozen people 
were killed, including by-standers and security personnel. 
 
 
¶3. (u) The other site was Neve Shalom synagogue, another of 
the community's main synagogues and the site of a 1986 
machine-gun and grenade attack by Abu Nidal that claimed 20 
lives.  Although not heavily-used for normal Sabbath 
services, it is the primary site for special occasions, and 
today's explosion took place during a bar mitzvah ceremony 
attended by 400 people.  Police on the scene told the CG that 
the bomb was carried by a small truck and that at least 10 
people were killed.  CG observed a large crater in front of 
the main entrance.  Fortunately, extensive security measures 
at the site appear to have limited the damage to the front 
section of the building, away from the main hall.  People 
attending the religious services were able to exit the 
building through a rear entrance. 
 
 
¶4. (c) It is too soon to say who might have conducted the 
attacks.  We have heard one report that IBDA-C (Islamic Great 
Eastern Raiders), a small and relatively inactive terrorist 
group, phoned the Anatolian news agency to claim 
responsibity.  Our assessment of this group's capabilities, 
however, suggests that they would be unable to conduct such 
an attack.  The Minister of Interior also told the Ambassador 
that these attacks do not fit the pattern of the PKK, DHKP-C, 
MLKP, or any of the local groups whose activities they track 
closely. 
 
 
¶5. (u) We have no reports so far that any American citizens 
were killed or injured at either site.  We are in touch with 
local hospitals to ensure that we are notified promptly if 
any Americans are brought in.  We did speak with one 
uninjured Amcit, Rabbi Mendy Chitrik, who was at the 
Ashkenzai synagogue, not far from Neve Shalom, at the time of 
the explosion. 
 
 
¶5. (c) Action Request: The Ambassador has expressed the 
condolences of the USG and offers of assistance to the 
Minister of Interior, the Foreign Ministry, and the Israeli 
Embassy; the CG has conveyed them to the Israeli CG and 
leadership of the Jewish community.  Because there are 
indications that this might be the work of international 
terrorist groups, post requests that we be authorized to 
offer FBI assistance to the Turkish authorities to assist 
them in their investigations. 
ARNETT