This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KATHMANDU 001413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS, SA/RA 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/28/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PREL NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: MAOISTS SET JULY 31 DEADLINE FOR POSSIBLE 
END TO CEASE-FIRE 
 
REF: KATHMANDU 1388 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1. (C) On July 25, Prime Minister Surya Bahadur Thapa's 
government replied to the Maoist letter setting 
pre-conditions for the resumption of peace talks (reftel). 
In its response, the Government of Nepal (GON) reaffirmed its 
commitment to the peace talks, but stated it would not 
concede to Maoist demands without first initiating the third 
round of negotiations. 
 
¶2. (C) On July 27, the insurgents responded to the GON in an 
8-page letter addressed to the negotiating team and signed by 
Maoist political leader Babarum Bhattarai.  The letter, which 
has not yet been made public, but which we expect soon will, 
demands that the GON implement its pre-conditions (reported 
reftel) by July 31 or face a break-down in the cease-fire. 
The final page of the letter summarizes the Maoist ultimatum 
and is provided below in rough translation: 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
 
Maoists have requested the government fulfill all the 
decisions (mentioned below) made during the first and second 
round of talks by July 31, 2003, Thursday to show the 
government's commitment towards the cease-fire.  If these 
pre-requisites for dialogue are fulfilled by then, then the 
Maoists would come for the third round of talks.  If not, the 
Maoists will conclude that the government has unilaterally 
dissolved the cease-fire and the dialogue. 
 
-- Implement the decision made during the second round of 
talks to limit the activities of the Royal Army within 5 
kilometers of the barracks, release the central level 
prisoners of war and publicize the whereabouts of the missing. 
 
-- In the new round of talks, the King should involve himself 
in the dialogue or give full authority to the formal dialogue 
team to make agreement on necessary subjects including the 
progressive political solution and have the determined 
authority to follow the agreements. 
 
-- The Royal Nepal Army should publicize its determination to 
follow the code of conduct and the decisions made during all 
rounds of talks. 
 
-- Abandon the anti-terrorist treaty signed recently with 
America for five years and throw out all the American 
military advisors and specialists from the country. 
 
-- Publicize the progressive agenda of the old regime. 
 
END TEXT 
 
¶3. (C) Comment.  The Maoist response to last week's letter 
from Prime Minister Thapa's negotiating team came 
unexpectedly fast, suggesting that the Maoist leadership had 
decided already to break the cease-fire and attempt to 
deflect responsibility for the failure of the talks onto the 
GON.  There is virtual unanimity among non-Maoist spokesmen 
for political and civil society that the GON will not and 
should not meet the insurgents' unrealistic pre-conditions 
for resumption of the peace talks.  Post will seek further 
information from government sources and hold an Emergency 
Action Committee in anticipation of renewed violence.  End 
Comment. 
 
MALINOWSKI