This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000425 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/CEN, WHA/CCA, DRL/IL, AND DS/OP/WHA 
STATE PASS USTR 
STATE PASS AID FOR LAC/CEN 
DOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ELAB ETRD PHUM PINR SOCI ASEC CU HO
SUBJECT: DEMONSTRATIONS IN TEGUCIGALPA: FOCUS IS ON GOH 
POLICIES, BUT SUB-THEMES ARE ANTI-U.S. AND PRO-CUBA 
 
REF: A. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2987 
     ¶B. 02 TEGUCIGALPA 2928 
 
Classified By: Political Chief Francisco Palmieri; 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (SBU) Political demonstrations continue off and on in 
Tegucigalpa, led by various small organizations, the loose 
political alliance known as the Popular Block, secondary 
teachers (COPEMH), and others.  Sometimes the protests are 
staged outside the Embassy, but more commonly they are held 
downtown in front of Congress.  Frequently, many of the 
"demonstrators" are bused in from outside Tegucigalpa.  These 
"protesters for hire" are paid for their services prior to 
leaving Tegucigalpa.  At some of the smaller demonstrations, 
few of the demonstrators, other than the leaders, appear to 
be from Tegucigalpa.  While persistent, they pose little 
threat to social order and do not appear to have captured the 
broader general public's support or interest. 
 
¶2. (U) The most recent demonstration outside the Embassy 
occurred January 30 with about 100-130 demonstrators 
organized by the Civic Council of Popular Organizations and 
Indigenous of Honduras (COPINH), and led by Salvadore Zuniga. 
 Protesters opposed a possible war in Iraq, privatization, 
and "neocolonialism."  The demonstrators also criticized Plan 
Colombia, CAFTA, U.S. policy in Cuba and Venezuela, U.S. 
military cooperation with Honduras, and the electricity 
contract for U.S. company AES.  The group then linked up with 
a larger group downtown organized by the Popular Block.  At 
the end of this larger demonstration protesters were told 
that there would be worldwide demonstrations at U.S. 
embassies, including in Tegucigalpa, on Saturday, February 
¶15.  The press has also repeated information about a possible 
anti-U.S. demonstration February 15. 
 
¶3. (U) Demonstrations are often pro-Cuban in flavor, such as 
the December 5, 2002 demonstration by 200 people outside the 
Embassy organized by the Honduras-Cuba Friendship Association 
(AHC), which protested alleged U.S. injustices against Cuba. 
The same day a larger demonstration downtown protested 
against the "privatization" of health services.  Carlos 
Reyes, leader of the Popular Block, criticized alleged U.S. 
"imperialism" at the larger demonstration. 
 
¶4. (U) The Popular Block and the secondary teachers are the 
most frequent demonstrators.  They protest privatization, 
civil service salary levels, and the public health system. 
These protests, however, are usually focused on GOH polices 
and not the USG, although they often have a anti-USG sub-text 
to them.  Popular Block leader Carlos Reyes has also written 
an anti-CAFTA and anti-FTAA booklet. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment:  None of the recent demonstrations, unlike 
one in October 2002 (ref A), have been violent, and they are 
still more a worry than a serious problem for the Maduro 
Administration.  Protests, however, are likely to heat up 
over a draft Civil Service Framework Bill, which the GOH has 
yet to introduce to Congress, that will likely de-link civil 
service salaries from being indexed to raises in the minimum 
wage.  Post also notes that there may be Cuban support for 
some of the anti-U.S. demonstrations, as evidenced by the 
December 5 demonstration organized by the Honduras-Cuba 
Friendship Association and the continual criticism of U.S. 
policy on Cuba in kitchen-sink style protests.  End Comment. 
Palmer