This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 KATHMANDU 001648 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS AND DS/IP/SA 
LONDON FOR POL/GURNEY, NSC FOR MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/29/2013 
TAGS: PTER ASEC PINS PGOV NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL: MAOIST HIT TEAMS SHOOT TWO ARMY COLONELS IN 
KATHMANDU 
 
REF: (A) KATHMANDU 1644 (B) IIR 6 867 0058 03 
 
     (KATHMANDU) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Michael E. Malinowski for reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (S)  Less than 24 hours after breaking the seven-month 
cease fire Maoist hit squads shot two Royal Nepal Army (RNA) 
colonels in separate incidents in Kathmandu on August 28. 
One died within hours of the attack; the other is in stable 
condition.  The security forces expect the Maoists to pursue 
a campaign of targeted assassinations in the capital 
(Reftel).  The two colonels, who were active in the RNA's 
counter-insurgency effort and who normally are not provided 
the security detail given to flag-rank officers, were 
politically significant--and easily accessible--targets.  The 
colonel is the highest-ranking RNA officer to have been 
killed by the Maoists in the seven years of the insurgency. 
Government of Nepal Cabinet ministers are deliberating on 
what actions the GON will take in response to the 
assassinations.  Reliable sources indicate that the GON will 
likely decide to re-declare the Maoists as a terrorist group, 
restore the anti-terrorist act, and issue Interpol 
blue-corner notices on Maoist leaders.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
MURDER AND MAYHEM IN THE MORNING 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Less than 24 hours after breaking a seven-month cease 
fire with the Government of Nepal (GON), Maoist assassination 
squads shot two Royal Nepal Army (RNA) colonels at their 
homes in Kathmandu on the morning of August 28.  In the first 
incident, a hit squad of four or five armed men shot Col. 
Kirin Bahadur Basnyat, assigned to the Eastern Division, 
several times when he came out of his house at approximately 
0730 local time.  One of the attackers reportedly was armed 
with a sub-machine gun.  Basnyat died approximately two hours 
later at the hospital.  At about 0835 local time, Col. 
Ramindra Chhetri was shot four times by a hit squad as he 
emerged from his Kathmandu home (approximately 5 km from the 
site of the Basnyat shooting).  He is reportedly in stable 
condition at the military hospital. 
 
------------------------- 
MID-LEVEL UP-AND-COMERS 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Both Basnyat and Chhetri were promising mid-level 
officers, trained in the US, who had been active in the GON's 
counter-insurgency effort.  Until recently, Basnyat was 
deputy commander of the 10th Brigade in charge of Nepal's 
Special Forces as well as chief of the counter-terrorist 
interrogation team in Kathmandu.  He had just returned to 
Kathmandu on August 2 after attending a three-week 
IMET-sponsored Executive Course at the National Defense 
University.  Basnyat had recently been given an important 
command in the Eastern Division.  (Note:  Eastern Division 
troops killed 17 Maoists, including some high-ranking local 
commanders, in an engagement in Ramechhap District on August 
¶17.  End note.)  Chhetri, who graduated from the U.S. Command 
and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, was in charge 
of the RNA's  psychological operations campaign against the 
Maoists.  He was recently reassigned as Assistant Director of 
Military Intelligence.  Chhetri has two successful brothers 
also in the military: Lt. Colonel Ratindra Khatri is 
aide-de-camp to King Gyanendra while Colonel Rajendra Chhetri 
is working at Nepal's Mission to the United Nations in New 
York. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
GON WILL LIKELY RE-DECLARE THE MAOISTS AS TERRORISTS 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (S) In a telephone conversation with the Ambassador, Major 
General Rookmangud Katawal, ranking military member of 
Nepal's National Security Council, reported that the GON 
Cabinet was deliberating over how to respond to the morning 
incidents.  He indicated that, with the King's support, the 
GON would likely re-declare the Maoists as a terrorist group, 
resurrect the now-suspended anti-terrorist act, and request 
Interpol blue-corner notices for Maoist leaders.  (Note.  The 
GON removed the terrorist label from the Maoists as a 
pre-condition for peace talks during the cease-fire.  End 
Note.)  Although the ministers had discussed the possibility 
of declaring a nation-wide state of emergency, it would 
likely not make that declaration at this time, he said. 
Katawal sought support from the international community for 
the government's efforts to combat the insurgency.  The 
Ambassador counseled against the declaration of a state of 
emergency or imposition of martial law at this time. 
 
¶5. (U) Post issued the following press statement in response 
to the Maoist attacks: 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
 
The U.S. Embassy denounces the terrorist attacks by the 
Maoists against two Royal Nepal Army Colonels this morning. 
These attacks demonstrate the Maoists' rejection of the 
Nepalese people's overwhelming call for peace and the 
Maoists' continued willingness to resort to brutal crimes to 
achieve their objectives.  The U.S. Embassy also condemns the 
Maoists' vicious attack on the Rastriya Banijya Bank in Dang 
District, resulting in the serious injury of a bank official. 
 The U.S. Embassy extends its heartfelt sympathy to the 
family of Colonel Kirin Basnyat who died from the terrorist 
assault, as well as to the families of those injured. 
Terrorist acts like these are exactly what earned the Maoists 
a place on the U.S. Terrorist Watch List. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
--------- 
COMMENT 
--------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Colonel Basnyat is the highest ranking army officer 
the Maoists have killed during the seven-year insurgency. 
The killings came as no surprise to GON security forces as 
they had been anticipating for months that the Maoists would 
conduct targeted assassinations within the capital.  The 
speed and accuracy with which the Maoists attacked suggests 
that the Maoist leadership did not precipitously break off 
the cease-fire, but rather indicates a well-planned and 
calmly-executed operation.  Both officers had close ties with 
the United States.  Post expects that the Maoists will 
conduct similar attacks in coming weeks.  End Comment. 
MALINOWSKI