This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR OIG/ISP - COMPLIANCE OFFICER WILLIS 
 
INFO:  WHA/EX, WHA/CEN, HR/OE, CA/EX AND INL 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASIG AMGT APER CMGT SNAR HN
SUBJECT:  INSPECTION OF EMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA (ISP-I-02-26) 
 
REF:      A) 02 TEGUCIGALPA 001775 
          B) 02 STATE 180302 
          C) 03 STATE 023800 
 
¶1.  Ref C requests a compliance update on OIG's post 
inspection of Embassy Tegucigalpa, ref: ISP-I-02-26.  The 
inspection was completed in February 2001 and has been in 
the compliance reporting phase since that time. 
 
¶2.  Embassy is providing additional information on the 
outstanding recommendations.  We are not repeating all 
past exchanges for each recommendation -- only the 
original recommendation itself is repeated for your 
reference. 
 
¶3.  Recommendation 2:  The department should endorse 
embassy Tegucigalpa's request for two additional Drug 
Enforcement Administration special agents.  Action: INL, 
in Consultation with Embassy Tegucigalpa. 
 
Updated post response:  In ref A post provided background 
Information to INL on the need for these agents.  We also 
included the new positions in the past two Mission 
Performance Plans for Honduras.  We await further action 
by the INL bureau. 
 
¶4.  Recommendation 5:  Embassy Tegucigalpa, in 
coordination with the department, should establish 
another junior officer position to do non-immigrant and 
immigrant visa Work.  Action:  Embassy Tegucigalpa and 
CA/EX. 
 
Updated post response:  CA/EX has established and filled 
a new Consular JO position.  The new officer will arrive 
in March 2003.  We assume that CA and WHA will add the 
necessary position support costs to our budget base this 
fiscal year. 
 
¶5.  Recommendation 6:  Embassy Tegucigalpa, in 
coordination with the Department, should authorize 
another consular FSN position to handle correspondence 
and public inquiries.  Action:  Embassy Tegucigalpa and 
CA/EX. 
 
Updated post response:  As stated in Ref A and 
previously, post is willing to establish a new PSA 
position.  Between WHA and CA, funding issues need to be 
addressed so that post will have the ongoing program or 
MRV budget money to fill this position. 
 
¶6.  Recommendation 10:  Embassy Tegucigalpa, in 
coordination with the Department, should phase out 
personnel management services provided to Joint Task 
Force Bravo for their host country employees.  Action: 
Embassy Tegucigalpa, in coordination with HR/OE. 
 
Updated post response:  In late September 2002, the 
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources 
(M/DGHR/OE), with the concurrence of OIG/ISP, signed a 
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with the Undersecretary of 
Defense for Personnel and Readiness.  Under the new MOA, 
State agrees to exercise its PSA hiring authority for an 
additional two-years with respect to the 62 Honduran 
nationals working at JTF Bravo, with the understanding 
that Defense will seek its own PSA authority from the 
Congress during that time period.  Human resources 
management services for the JTF Bravo Honduran employees 
will continue under the US Mission's existing ICASS 
arrangements until September 30, 2004. 
 
PALMER