This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000282 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, DRL, AND DRL/CRA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM
SUBJECT:  USG promotion of human rights in Sri Lanka 
 
Ref:  State 13790 
 
¶1.  Per Reftel, Mission's response to the request for 
information on how we are promoting human rights in Sri 
Lanka follows: 
 
¶2.  PEACE PROCESS:  The ongoing peace process has had 
more of a direct and dramatic impact on improving the 
human rights situation in Sri Lanka than any other 
factor during the past year.  Mission contributes to the 
peace process in numerous ways, including through 
consistent and high-level use of public diplomacy tools, 
and also private interaction with key actors.  Another 
visible means of assistance was the donation of 
approximately USD 500,000 to help start up the GSL's 
Peace Secretariat.  The Secretariat is still using those 
funds.  USAID has also contributed close to USD 1.5 
million to support the peace process through several 
projects, including the provision of technical experts 
to the Peace Secretariat and for outreach programs to 
engage the public.  Other programs to assist and 
reinforce the peace process are being considered. 
 
¶3.  LEAHY CHECKS/MILITARY:  In the past, Mission has on 
occasion refused training for certain security force 
personnel because of their possible involvement in human 
rights violations.  Mission has informed the Sri Lankan 
security forces of the necessity of conducting a human 
rights based background check on personnel recommended 
for training.  The past year has seen the security 
forces become more self-limiting as to who is nominated 
for proposed training programs.  In addition, Mission 
personnel have presented numerous demarches to various 
levels of the GSL on the need to address the issue of 
impunity within the security forces.  In that regard, 
the security forces appear to be taking steps to 
overcome a history of human rights violations and 
impunity with the opening of multiple investigations 
during the year.  There have also been some convictions. 
 
¶4.  INTERNATIONAL VISITORS PROGRAM (IVP):  Mission uses 
IVP grants to further its MPP goals in regard to the 
promotion of human rights and religious tolerance. 
During the past year, for example, Mission nominated a 
Sri Lankan Muslim leader to participate in an "Islam in 
America" program.  Mission also nominated a number of 
key individuals from human rights organizations for 
programs focusing on improving organizational modalities 
and how to focus on human rights-related judicial 
actions. 
 
¶5.  LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (LTTE):  The LTTE is 
on the Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) list and 
Mission does not have direct contact with its members. 
During the course of the year, however, Mission has 
repeatedly made public statements raising concerns about 
the forcible recruitment of children and the harassment 
of the minority Muslim population in the east by the 
LTTE.  Moreover, Mission regularly meets with Tamil 
politicians and other Tamil leaders who are believed to 
have contact with the LTTE.  Mission delivers consistent 
messages to these interlocutors on the need for the LTTE 
to stop employing violence and terrorism, stop 
recruiting children, embrace pluralism, and abide by all 
other international human rights standards.  Although 
Mission's contributions were only one part of a larger 
campaign by the international community aimed at 
prompting responsiveness from the LTTE, at year's end 
tensions between the Muslim community and LTTE had eased 
somewhat, and the LTTE has agreed to renew its work with 
UNICEF to stop child recruitment and counteract the 
effects on those already recruited. 
 
¶6.  JUDICIAL REFORM:  Mission has taken the first steps 
toward implementing a DRL-funded project to address 
Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) cases.  The GSL has a 
history of using PTA cases to arrest Tamils arbitrarily. 
The PTA permitted the government to hold these 
individuals in remand for an undetermined amount of 
time.  Some individuals have been in custody for a 
matter of years without having their cases heard in 
court.  As part of the ongoing peace process, the GSL 
has not arrested anyone under the PTA during the past 
year and has actively begun to re-examine PTA cases. 
Taking advantage of the GSL's newfound openness on these 
cases, Mission -- using DRL funds -- has initiated the 
purchasing of equipment to process the cases and is in 
the final stages of helping fund attorneys for 
individuals still in custody. 
 
¶7.  SPECIFIC PROJECTS:  In addition to regular contact 
with GSL representatives on human rights issues, Mission 
also supports individual programs focused on specific 
issues.  For example, Mission has provided assistance to 
the National Child Protection Authority and the Don 
Boscoe Technical Center for their work in combating 
trafficking in children and rehabilitating those that 
have been sexually exploited.  A demining program was 
also conducted to assist in permitting IDP's to safely 
return to their home communities in Jaffna District. 
Mission continues to look for opportunities to support 
specific human rights programs as part of the USG's 
promotion of human rights in Sri Lanka. 
 
¶8.  Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS