This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000203 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
CINCPAC FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/04/2012 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM BM
SUBJECT: REGIME PRESENTS EVIDENCE ON POLITICAL ARRESTS 
 
REF: RANGOON 185 
 
Classified By: CDA, a.i., RON MCMULLEN FOR REASON 1.5(D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  The SPDC presented its evidence against 
political activists arrested over the last month in a 
February 10 press conference.  The activists were allegedly 
conspiring with "insurgent and terrorist" groups in Thailand. 
 While one of those arrested was allegedly planning some 
explosions, the rest were reportedly only guilty of 
attempting to distribute leaflets against the regime and 
planning protests.  The regime issued a statement on February 
13 complimenting "the vast majority" of political figures in 
the country who are not acting outside the law.  The NLD told 
Emboffs that while it had no specific knowledge of the 
alleged actions of the NLD members among those arrested, it 
did not doubt that they may have connections with exile 
groups.  The arrests obviously serve as a warning that 
political activities are still very closely monitored and 
that any criticism of the regime will be dealt with harshly. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U)  On February 11, the state-controlled newspaper, "The 
New Light of Myanmar," provided a detailed account of a 
February 10 Ministry of Defense news conference on recent 
arrests of political activists.  The purpose of the news 
conference was to provide information on "the anti-government 
activities perpetrated by expatriate NLD terrorist insurgents 
and NCGUB in cooperation with some members of the NLD and 
SNLD parties within the country."  It also claimed that the 
All Burma Democratic Student Front (ABSDF) played a role in 
the activities. 
 
¶3. (U)  The evidence presented against the activists was a 
rambling, often incoherent description of trips various 
individuals made between the border area and Rangoon, 
training in insurgent camps in Thailand, transfers of funds, 
Xeroxing of anti-government pamphlets, and "causing unrest." 
The most serious charges, of planning to cause explosions, 
were leveled at a Thet Nwe, alias Nyein Lu, who was 
reportedly sent by the expatriate NLD and ABSDF in Thailand. 
The offenses of the rest of those arrested revolved around 
political organizing activities of a Maung Maung Aye, who was 
reportedly planning to stage two protests in Rangoon in 
April. 
 
¶4. (U)  In justifying the crackdown, the regime spokesperson 
at the press conference said that "during the transitional 
period, the government wants to see stable, peaceful and 
disciplined political movement.  Holding the attitudes and 
thoughts of 88, some politicians found weaknesses and faults 
with the government and the Tatmadaw, exaggerated them and 
caused unrest.  It was found that they commited destructive 
acts after contacting with unlawful groups secretly and 
receiving assistance from them.  Such acts are to be 
exposed." 
 
¶5. (U)  On February 13, the SPDC Information Committee issued 
a statement that the regime appreciated "the vast majority" 
of political figures in Burma that are working toward 
transition peacefully and by legal means.  Noting that the 
government is laying a foundation of peace and stability and 
ensuring that all 10 political parties in Burma may act 
freely and without interference within the framework of the 
law, it said the government regretted when some members of 
political parties acted in violation of their own party's 
regulations and deliberately broke national laws.  It noted 
that "these individuals will, of course, be tried fairly in a 
court of law, and are considered innocent until proven 
guilty." 
 
¶6. (C)  NLD Spokesperson U Lwin and Aung San Suu Kyi have 
told embassy officers that while the NLD had no direct 
knowledge of the alleged actions of the NLD members 
implicated in the arrests, they did not doubt that the 
charges may be at least partly true.  They said that while 
the NLD tries to maintain tight party discipline precisely to 
avoid any activities the regime may deem illegal, some 
members probably do have contacts with exile groups (in 
itself an illegal act), and may take more risks as a result. 
U Lwin cited an incident about two months ago when military 
intelligence called him complaining bitterly that someone had 
placed NLD flags along the entire length of the historic U 
Bein footbridge near Mandalay (an incident not noted in the 
recent arrests).  U Lwin said he honestly had no idea who had 
done this but he sent word to the Mandalay NLD office that MI 
was threatening to make arrests if there were any additional 
problems.  He said these recent arrests should serve as a 
reminder to those outside the country who criticize the NLD 
for not being more assertive that it takes very little to end 
up in prison. 
 
¶7. (C)  Comment:  These arrests obviously serve as a warning 
that political activities are still very closely monitored 
and that any criticism of the regime will be dealt with 
harshly.  The NLD continues to maintain a non-confrontational 
profile in hopes of demonstrating to the SPDC that it can and 
will play according to the regime's strict rules.  It is a 
difficult line to hold given rapidly deteriorating 
socio-economic conditions, but the alternative would be a 
return to the confrontations, arrests, and attrition of NLD 
members in the 1990's. 
¶8. (C)  Comment Cont'd:  One worrisome aspect of the February 
13 SPDC information sheet is that it specifies that only the 
10 legal parties may act freely.  Most of the political 
parties in the opposition coalition group, the Committee 
Representing the Peoples' Parliament (CRPP), were 
deregistered by the regime after the 1990 elections and are 
not included in the 10 legal parties.  Hopefully, the 
information sheet was not meant as a warning of possible 
arrests if these parties continue to participate in the CRPP. 
 End Comment. 
McMullen