This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 002000 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT, INR/NESA; NSC FOR E. 
MILLARD 
 
PLEASE ALSO PASS TOPEC 
 
E.O. 12958:     DECL: 11-19-13 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PINR CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  As Tamil Tigers get ready for their important 
annual address, chief spokesman Balasingham reemerges 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1989, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by James F. Entwistle, Deputy Chief of 
Mission.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Chief Tamil Tiger spokesman Anton 
Balasingham is set to resume his duties following a 
hiatus of several months reportedly caused by health 
problems.  Balasingham's reemergence comes as Tiger 
leader V. Prabhakaran prepares for his "Heroes' Day" 
address, the LTTE's most important annual recitation of 
policy.  Amid word that Balasingham is helping craft the 
November 27 speech, there are no indications as of yet 
that the Tigers are planning any marked policy shifts in 
this year's version.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) BALASINGHAM REEMERGES:  Chief Liberation 
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) spokesman Anton Balasingham 
is set to resume his duties following a hiatus of 
several months (see Reftels).  According to a 
November 18 posting on "TamilNet," a website that is 
almost invariably authoritative for LTTE-related 
matters, Balasingham will resume his duties following 
several months of rest taken earlier this year due to 
"deteriorating health."  By way of explaining his health 
situation, the posting asserts that the London-based 
Balasingham was advised by doctors not to travel for a 
period because he "suffers from diabetes, coronary 
conditions, and a transplanted kidney."  The article 
states that Balasingham "is now well enough to resume 
his duties."  The TamilNet posting goes on to relate 
that Balasingham will travel to LTTE-controlled areas of 
Sri Lanka in January 2004 to discuss the LTTE's "peace 
strategy" with LTTE leader V. Prabakharan and other 
senior Tiger officials. 
 
¶3.  (C) With its detailed review of health matters, the 
TamilNet posting appeared to be putting a damper on 
speculation that Balasingham's absence was due to his 
being edged out of LTTE leadership ranks for political 
reasons (see Reftels).  When asked, Joseph 
Pararajasingham, a Tamil National Alliance MP of 
strongly pro-LTTE inclinations, told polchief 
November 19 that he thought Balasingham's hiatus had 
been completely due to his longstanding health problems 
and that politics had nothing to do with it. 
Pararajasingham allowed that S.P. Thamilchelvam, the 
group's Sri Lanka-based political chief, had a "much 
higher profile now" after replacing Balasingham as chief 
LTTE representative at numerous functions in recent 
months. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) NOVEMBER 27 ADDRESS:  Balasingham's 
reemergence comes as LTTE leader V. Prabhakaran prepares 
for his annual "Heroes' Day" address.  First celebrated 
by the LTTE in 1989, the event commemorates "Lt. 
Shankar," a close associate of Prabhakaran's who died in 
combat in 1982.  Some of the impetus for the "Heroes' 
Day" address and its attendant celebrations no doubt 
also flows from the fact that Prabhakaran's birthday is 
November 26.  (Prabhakaran will be 49 years old.) 
Through the years, the speech has become the group's 
most important annual recitation of its policies.  The 
2001 iteration, for example, was quite accommodating, 
heralding the LTTE's support for the commencement of a 
peace process with the GSL.  The 2002 version was 
somewhat more combative, but it was still pro-peace 
process. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) "Heroes' Day" is typically marked by large 
LTTE-instigated rallies held throughout the north/east. 
Contacts have told us that this year's event will be 
held on an even larger and grander scale than in the 
past.  In the meantime, unconfirmed reports indicate 
that the Tigers have been forcefully soliciting 
contributions from Tamil civilians to fund the 
November 27 commemoration. 
 
¶6.  (C) There is word that Balasingham's return to his 
duties may have been timed to allow him to assist in the 
drafting of this year's speech.  Balasingham has 
traditionally had a hand in putting together past 
"Heroes' Day" speeches, many of which bear his clear 
imprimatur in their somewhat dogmatic, dialectical 
style. 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT:  If one takes LTTE claims at face 
value, Balasingham's return is simply a matter of an 
improvement in his health.  That could be true.  At the 
same time, if he was actually on the outs with the 
group's leadership, the LTTE might have decided that it 
had to bring the experienced, knowledgeable Balasingham 
back right away because of the recent, confusing rush of 
political events in the south.  Regarding this year's 
"Heroes' Day" address, pro-LTTE Tamil politicians have 
told us that they do not expect any marked policy 
shifts.  That said, the LTTE inner circle usually keeps 
the speech close hold, so surprises are always possible. 
END COMMENT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD