This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002612 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2010 
TAGS: EU IZ NL PREL
SUBJECT: DUTCH FM-DESIGNATE SAYS TIES TO U.S. A TOP PRIORITY 
 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY AMB CLIFFORD SOBEL FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND 
 (D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  On October 10, FM-designee Ben Bot met with Amb. 
Sobel.  Bot said he is committed to building upon the strong 
U.S.-Netherlands foundation that FM de Hoop Scheffer and PM 
Balkenende have set, including using the 2004 Dutch EU 
presidency to strengthen transatlantic relations.  He 
expressed particular gratitude for the Secretary's October 3 
phone call, and said he would work closely and creatively 
with the U.S. embassy to "get results" from the U.S.-Dutch 
partnership. 
 
¶2.   (C)  Bot said that the French government has asked the 
GoNL to join what he called ongoing discussions among France, 
Germany and the UK to reconcile differences over security 
policy.  The goal, he said, is to find a way to realize 
European aspirations without harming NATO or transatlantic 
interests.  The ambassador raised the urgent need for more 
assistance to Iraq.  Bot gave every indication that he 
thought he could wrest more money out of his government, but 
that it would take time and a focused effort.  He said Dutch 
business wants the GONL to play a bigger role, assuming that 
would enhance their chance of getting contracts.  He also 
said the Dutch need to become more aware of the humanitarian 
need in Iraq.  With a tight budget, most Dutch, including in 
parliament and the developmental community, see Iraq as a 
lower humanitarian priority than Africa, for example. 
 
¶3. (C)  Bot expects to be sworn in mid-day December 3, one 
day after the end of the OSCE ministerial, which FM de Hoop 
Scheffer will chair.  Bot indicated that he would be 
delighted if it were possible to meet with the Secretary in 
The Hague on December 3 before traveling to the NATO 
ministerial.  He indicated that he would be out of The Hague 
for most of December, but expressed an interest in going to 
the United States as soon as possible in 2004 to make clear 
the priority of the Dutch-U.S. relationship. 
SOBEL