This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L LAGOS 002434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/28/2013 
TAGS: ASEC EPET PGOV PINR PHUM EINV NI
SUBJECT: EXPAT OIL WORKERS KIDNAPPED IN NIGER DELTA -- MORE 
TO COME? 
 
 
Classified By: J GREGOIRE FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) On Thursday, November 27, seven expatriates were 
kidnapped in Nigeria's Niger Delta region. One has escaped or 
has been released.  No American citizens appear to be 
involved. 
 
 
¶2. (CO) The seven expatriate employees of the Canadian 
pipe-coating company Bredero Shaw were kidnapped off a boat 
near Warri (they reportedly hail from Britain, Australia, 
Russia and possibly Brazil and/or Colombia).  An oil company 
security manager reported that the kidnappers are Ijaw, who 
released one hostage.  On November 28, Econoff was informed 
of the kidnapping by Frank Omare, Special Assistant to the 
Governor of Delta State, where Warri is located.  Omare is 
one of several new special assistants of Ijaw ethnicity 
Governor James Ibori appointed to assist the Delta State 
Security Council react to violence in the Warri region. (Some 
speculate that Ibori has made Ijaw appointments to his circle 
of advisors as a way to increasingly factionalize the various 
Ijaw militant groups.)  Omare noted one of the hostages 
escaped.  Omare told Econoff that the Nigerian Navy had 
"seized suspected points" along the waterways, but he could 
not elaborate on that statement at that moment.  He said he 
was on his way from Asaba to Warri to assist in the release 
of the remaining hostages. 
 
 
¶3. (CO) Also on November 28, Dudley McDaniel, Operational 
Manager for Chevron's Escravos oil terminal and tank farm, 
told Econoff that he was informed that the kidnappings took 
place as the workers were practicing a water evacuation drill 
from their Warri facilities. Mcaniel said one of the 
kidnapped crew escaped on Friday, November 28, and reported 
that the victims were hooded and transported to an unknown 
location by boat, and that the trip took approximately two 
hours.  McDaniels also said the Navy and other elements of 
Operation Restore Hope have stepped up patrols and were 
taking steps to intercede in the kidnappings. 
 
 
¶4. (CO) This event highlights a sudden upsurge in kidnappings 
in the Delta region during the month of November (septel). 
This week, a Halliburton security manager sent an inquiry to 
the general security community asking for corroboration of a 
report that criminal elements in the swamp regions are 
planning multiple actions across the Delta during the 
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) scheduled 
for the first week of December in Abuja.  The report, 
considered credible by the source, indicated that the goal of 
the actions would be to shut down all oil production from the 
Delta during the CHOGM, which is to be highlighted by a visit 
from the Queen of England. 
 
 
¶5. (CO) Chevron's McDaniel told Econoff that he was aware of 
no specific threat as described above.  He did say that 
perhaps in preparation for the CHOGM activities, the Nigerian 
Navy has been conducting exercises in and around the 
Escravos/Warri area this week.  He noted an impressive 
display and use of three former buoy tenders given the GON by 
the USG earlier this year, and that the Navy used a Chevron 
floating rig to practice assaults and hostage release 
scenarios.  He said the troops appeared well organized and 
capable. 
 
 
¶6. (CO) COMMENT:  We have no corroboration of the report that 
mass action will take place in the Delta in conjunction with 
CHOGM.  The Delta "criminal elements" are factionalized among 
ethnic groups and even within ethnic groups.  The region is 
plagued by simple bandits and robbers, illegal oil bunkerers 
and pirates, whose financial and political interests differ 
greatly, making it difficult to foresee an organized attempt 
at massive disruption.  However, it is possible that an Ijaw 
umbrella group could spread the word that it is encouraging 
action of some kind during the CHOGM, thus leading to 
several, if not many, independent incidents of banditry, 
vandalism and/or kidnapping.  This would pose a far more 
difficult scenario for the GON -- or the instigators -- to 
contain once under way.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
GREGOIRE 
HINSON-JONES