This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002660 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DHS SEC. RIDGE FROM AMB. SOBEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OVIP ASEC NL
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER AND NOTIONAL SCHEDULE FOR VISIT BY DHS 
SECRETARY RIDGE TO THE NETHERLANDS, OCT. 25-27 
 
SIPDIS 
 
REF: A. STATE 291919 
     ¶B. THE HAGUE 2648 
 
¶1. (U) Message contains sensitive information.  Protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2. (U) We are pleased, Mr. Secretary, you are able to include 
the Netherlands in your European travels this time.  In your 
last visit here in November 2002, you laid the groundwork for 
increased bilateral progress on counterterrorism issues 
through our Safe Borders Initiative.  Those efforts continue 
to bear fruit.  In March, the Netherlands hosted bilateral 
discussions with us on judicial aspects of CT cooperation. 
In late June, we reciprocated with meetings in Washington on 
critical infrastructure protection (CIP) for a large 
delegation of Dutch officials.  In August, Energy Sec. 
Abraham signed an agreement with the Dutch Government for the 
installation of monitors at the Port of Rotterdam to detect 
the shipment of nuclear and radiological materials - the 
first such agreement in the world.  One of the results of 
that agreement is that DOE technical experts are currently in 
country providing training to their Dutch counterparts. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Even as the Dutch have proved to be cooperative CT 
partners, they face obstacles to effective action.  Much of 
Europe finds it difficult to come to terms with the fact that 
the world - and the terrorism threat - has changed 
fundamentally.  Some of these problems are systemic, such as 
the Dutch system of consensual political decision-making that 
often prevents decisive action.  In addition, the Dutch 
system of "stovepiping" hampers coordination of CT efforts. 
The Dutch, therefore, can learn from the U.S. experience in 
establishing your Department. 
 
¶4. (SBU) From your dinner with Prime Minister Balkenende in 
early September in Washington, you are aware of his 
Government's commitment to support bilateral and multilateral 
CT efforts.  The themes we hope you express during your visit 
here will re-enforce the discussions you had with the PM: 
 
- expressing appreciation for Dutch cooperation 
- addressing the need to continue to move forward on CT 
efforts 
- realizing the terrorist threat is real and present and not 
directed solely at the U.S. 
- stressing that coordination and integration of ministries' 
effort is essential for effective CT programs. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The bilateral program will give you the opportunity 
to see most of the important players in CT issues here: 
Finance Minister Zalm (responsible for CSI), Justice Minister 
Donner (responsible for prosecution of alleged terrorists), 
Foreign Minister-designate Bot (responsible for setting Dutch 
bilateral and multilateral CT agenda), Parliamentary leaders 
(considering MoJ legislation to strengthen the fight against 
terrorism) and senior Dutch government officials at Interior, 
Customs, Defense, MFA and the Prime Minister's Office 
(responsibile for the ministries and agencies that need to 
improve coordination and integration).  The notional schedule 
is: 
 
SATURDAY, OCT. 25 
 
- 0635          Arrival at Valkenburg Air Base 
- 0700          Arrival at Ambassador's Residence 
                Personal time 
- 1830          Light dinner with HRH Princess Margriet and 
Deputy PM/Finance Minster Zalm 
 
SUNDAY, OCT 26 
 
- 0845          Briefing by Dutch Intelligence Service (AIVD) 
- 0915-1015     Coffee with Dr. Bernard Bot, Foreign 
Minister-designate 
- 1045          Interview with Elsevier magazine 
- 1115          Meeting with Europol Director Juergen Storbeck 
- 1200-1700     Informal CT discussion with visiting US 
Ambassadors 
 
MONDAY, OCT. 27 
 
- 0730          Light breakfast with Parliamentary leaders 
- 0830          Breakfast with Justice Minister Donner and 
senior government officials 
- 0950          Depart for Valkenburg Air Base 
- 1020          Meet with DHS employees (Customs, Coast 
Guard, TSA) 
- 1045          Depart for Madrid 
 
¶6. (U)  We look forward to your visit, which will help remind 
the Dutch to keep the fight against terrorism a top priority. 
 
SOBEL