This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/12/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINS TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S INITIAL CALL ON FORMER PRESIDENT 
SULEYMAN DEMIREL 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman; reasons: 1.5 (b,d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In an introductory call by the Ambassador, 
former president Demirel urged a repair to the relationship 
between the Pentagon and TGS; underscored the importance of 
higher-impact U.S. public diplomacy; called for the U.S. to 
project its power by finishing the job in Iraq without major 
UN influence; and cautioned us on the Kurds.  Ambassador 
reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to stay the course in Iraq, 
noted the importance of broadening our bilateral focus beyond 
Iraq; and reaffirmed our commitment to deal with PKK/KADEK. 
End summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Warmly welcoming the Ambassador to Turkey and wishing 
him success in what will be a "tough job", former president 
(1993-2000) Suleyman Demirel laid out a 40-minute 
comprehensive vision of how to restrengthen bilateral 
relations, handle Iraq, and deal with the Kurdish question. 
 
 
¶3. (C) In the long history of our alliance, Turkey and the 
U.S. have faced problems before, for instance 1975-78 the 
U.S. applied an arms embargo in the wake of Turkey's 
intervention in Cyprus, Demirel recalled.  However, we worked 
through the problems.  Both sides made mistakes in the run-up 
to the Parliament's March 1 rejection of U.S. deployment to 
Iraq through Turkey.  But it's not the end of the world. 
Now, despite unfortunate doubts in the U.S. regarding 
Turkey's trustworthiness, it is important for the Pentagon 
and TGS to improve their relations. 
 
 
¶4. (C) There is a challenge for the U.S. on the public 
relations side as well, Demirel said.  He understood that the 
main purpose of OIF was to demonstrate the strength of the 
U.S. after September 11.  But the man in the street doesn't 
understand why the U.S. hasn't yet found Iraq's WMD or 
Saddam.  People call the U.S. an occupier, where the word in 
Turkish is even harsher.  This is wrong.  The U.S. liberated 
Iraq.  But why have you not been able to explain this to the 
world?  People doubt whether the U.S. will stick it out. 
U.S. failure is not an option, and it would have been better 
if President Bush had not said in his Sept. 8 address that 
the U.S. doesn't have the resources to finish the job.  If 
one says "I am powerful but I'm unable to do the job" one 
gets no respect.  The U.S. should not leave Iraq to the UN. 
Regarding the upcoming U.S. $8.5 billion loan, Washington 
should emphasize that there is no linkage with a possible 
Turkish troop contribution to a stabilization force. 
 
 
¶5. (C) If the U.S. and Turkey cannot be friends, Turkey won't 
be helpful in the region, Demirel continued.  Turkey is very 
sensitive about the Kurds.  They are our brothers, our 
citizens.  Yet nationalism based on race is something 
powerful, and there are 25 million Kurds, although not all 
speaking the same language.  Some talk about a Kurdish state. 
 But it must not be from Turkish territory as Kurdish 
nationalists desire.  The PKK question is of utmost 
sensitivity for Turkey, and the U.S. should never 
underestimate this.  Turkey lost "40,000" people fighting the 
PKK.  We know the U.S. indebtedness to the Kurds in Iraq for 
their assistance against Saddam, but U.S. sympathies should 
not extend to the point where Turkey is hurt.  A federal 
Kurdistan in Iraq will hurt Turkey, because it will become 
independent in 10-25 years. 
 
 
¶6. (C) In response, the Ambassador laid out the post-conflict 
challenges the coalition faces but underscored President 
Bush's and the American people's determination to see the job 
done and done right.  An $87 billion supplemental request is 
proof of our seriousness.  We are also committed to 
consulting with Turkey, as demonstrated by talks on technical 
details surrounding a possible Turkish deployment and the 
beginning of talks on a common strategy to deal with 
PKK/KADEK.  Bilateral relations  were driven by Iraq over the 
past year but our relations must develop on a broader basis. 
Turkey's economic and political success and full integration 
into the EU will have important resonance for the larger 
question of reform in the Arab world.  On a broader plane, 
what is the key to renewing U.S.-Turkish ties? 
 
 
¶7. (C) Noting that during his studies in the U.S. that 
Americans are in a hurry to get the job done, Demirel 
counseled above all else, patience with the different sense 
of time and timing in Turkey.  He added as essential elements 
(1)  maintenance of a full dialogue with Turkish authorities 
across the board; (2) development of full, open relations 
with the press; (3) the importance for Turkish public opinion 
of even small gestures of good will. 
 
 
¶8. (C) Demirel noted in closing that he will be in the States 
for 10 days from Sept. 29 to help commemorate the 50th 
anniversary of the Eisenhower Fellowships (of which he was a 
beneficiary) in Philadelphia and to deliver speeches at CUNY 
in New York, Cornell, and several SUNY campuses.  Demirel's 
memory remains acute; he retains the ability to give a 
sweeping summary based on concrete facts; his stamina appears 
intact. 
EDELMAN