This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T ANKARA 001737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NP/CBM, EUR/SE, IO/PHO, NEA/NGA, AND INR/SPM 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 1.6 (X1, X6) 
TAGS: PARM PREL ETTC IZ TU UNSC CBW
SUBJECT: S12-03: TURKS REQUEST FURTHER DETAILS & UPDATE ON 
S13-03, S01-03, AND S32-02 
 
 
REF: A. STATE 70562 
     ¶B. ANKARA 1666 
     ¶C. ANKARA 1037 
     ¶D. ANKARA 891 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reasons 1.6 (X1) 
and (X6). 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 5. 
 
 
¶2.  (S) Polmiloff met Ferhat Alkan, of the MFA Iraq Desk, and 
delivered Ref A points on March 18.  As has been the case 
with similar demarches, MFA showed appreciation for the 
information and a ready willingness to forward our points to 
the Turkish National Intelligence Organization, the General 
Staff, and, via the Undersecretariat of Foreign Trade, to 
Turkish Customs.  Alkan expressed a degree of surprise about 
our close interest in CBW.  He said that he thought it would 
be unlikely that U.S. troops would have to engage Iraqi 
forces at close enough quarters for CBW to be an issue. 
 
 
¶3.  (S) Separately and later on March 18, econoff raised Ref 
A points and followed-up on Refs B, C, and D with Tevfik 
Mengu, DG for Agreements at Foreign Trade.  Contradicting 
what MFA told us as reported Ref B, Mengu said that if 
shipments of goods to countries other than Iraq were legal, 
Foreign Trade would not be able to stop them.  Econoff 
emphasized that stainless steel heat exchangers and 
meteorological balloons are controlled items that could 
facilitate Iraq's use of CBW against U.S. forces, and asked 
Foreign Trade to do all it could to stop their delivery to 
Iraq. 
 
 
¶4.  (S) Econoff asked Mengu to check with Turkish Customs on 
the companies identified in reftels (and previous): 
 
 
-- Enrofloxacin (Ref A): Mengu checked with Foreign Trade 
staff during the meeting and found no record of any 
application by "Vetal Veterinary Vaccine Company" to export 
to Iraq. 
 
 
-- Stainless steel heat exchangers (Ref B): Mengu noted that 
there is a very reputable Turkish construction firm called 
Atilla Dogan, which is presumably not the same firm 
identified in Ref B.  After checking with Customs, he 
reported that the company had made no shipments to Iraq. 
 
 
-- Meteorological balloons (Ref C): Mengu phoned Yavuz 
Engineering and Industry during the meeting and contacted 
Turkish Customs about the export.  Yavuz denied any shipment 
of these items to any customer.  Customs reported no record 
of any shipments by this company to Iraq. 
 
 
-- Atropine autoinjectors (Ref D): Mengu confirmed what MFA 
told us as reported in Ref B.  The Turkish firm has not 
shipped any autoinjectors to Iraq since August 2002, and the 
company was in fact doing very little business of any kind 
due to tight health-care budgets in Turkey. 
 
 
Econoff will follow-up to determine whether there is any 
record of shipments for these companies/items to Jordan or 
Syria. 
 
 
¶5.  (S) Action Request: Both MFA and Foreign Trade asked us 
for further information on Vetal Veterinary Vaccine Company. 
Our interlocutors were concerned that the company's name 
might be insufficient for locating the Turkish side of the 
transaction.  Post requests that the Department provide 
further identifying details, if available, regarding Vetal 
Veterinary Vaccine Company.  End Action Request. 
 
 
PEARSON