This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

241041Z Dec 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 008454 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/24/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ JO
SUBJECT: BACKLASH AGAINST CAPTURE OF SADDAM HUSSEIN 
 
REF: AMMAN 08196 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for Reasons 1.5 (b),(d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Although many Jordanians received the news of Saddam 
Hussein's capture with satisfaction or ambivalence (see ref), 
there has been some recent backlash against his arrest and 
perceived treatment by U.S. forces.  A majority of members of 
Parliament denounced the "mean and humiliating" manner of 
Saddam's capture and the broadcast of "humiliating footage of 
a former Arab president," but made clear that their views did 
not reflect support or opposition to the policies of Saddam 
himself.  A demonstration in the city of Irbid called for 
Saddam's release, and Jordan's Bar Association formed a legal 
"defense panel" for Iraq's "legitimate president."  These 
moves are more indicative of opposition to U.S. policy and 
the occupation of Iraq than genuine support for the former 
Iraqi dictator.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
MPs DECRY SADDAM'S "HUMILIATION" 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Sixty-five of the 110 members of the Lower House of 
Parliament lent their names to a statement released to the 
press December 20 that condemned the manner of Saddam 
Hussein's arrest, describing it as "mean and humiliating." 
The statement denounced the airing of television footage and 
photographs of Saddam following his capture as "a humiliation 
to the states and the people of the region."  The legislators 
further condemned the occupation of Iraq as part of a "wider 
Zionist plan," called for the U.S. to withdraw its forces 
from the Middle East, and urged the GOJ to press the U.S. to 
transfer control of Iraq to the Iraqi people as soon as 
possible. 
 
¶3.  (U) The MPs' statement did not, however, express direct 
support for Saddam or call for his release from custody. 
Rather, it said that the MPs objected to Saddam's treatment 
by his captors "regardless of whether we agree with him or 
oppose him." 
 
¶4.  (U) According to the Arabic press, the statement was 
primarily the handiwork of MPs Mahmoud Kharabsheh (East 
Banker, Balqa) and Khalil Ateyeh (West Banker, Amman - 1st 
District).  During the debate in Parliament prior to a vote 
of confidence in the government of Prime Minister Faisal 
al-Fayez, the head of the Democratic Alliance bloc, Mamdouh 
Abbadi (East Banker, Amman - 3rd District) drew a round of 
applause when he saluted the Iraqi resistance and Saddam 
Hussein.  He called Saddam "a true hero who fought until the 
last minute." 
 
----------------------- 
TAKING IT TO THE STREET 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) A demonstration was held December 21 in the northern 
city of Irbid which, according to organizers, was to "show 
solidarity" with Saddam and to demand his freedom.  The 
Arabic press reported that there were "hundreds" of 
participants in the peaceful demonstration who waved pictures 
of Saddam and condemned U.S. occupation of Iraq, as well as 
the "shameful silence" of Arab governments.  Post has been 
unable to confirm the true size of the protest and it is 
likely that a number of demonstrators were "placed" there to 
keep an eye on the situation. 
 
------------------------ 
"OBJECTION, YOUR HONOR!" 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U) The Jordanian Bar Association placed an advertisement 
December 20 in the press announcing the formation of a 
"defense panel" for Saddam, "the legitimate president of Iraq 
who was subjected, along with Iraq and the people of Iraq, to 
an armed robbery by the occupation troops."  Over 300 
attorneys have allegedly volunteered for the panel. 
 
¶7.  (U) The decision to create a defense panel was 
spearheaded by the outspoken head of the Bar Association, 
Hussein Mujali.  When asked about the celebrations in Iraq 
following Saddam's capture, Mujali had told reporters, "In 
any country there are opportunists...I will not be surprised 
if all we have seen on TV showing the jubilance of the Iraqi 
population is a cheap Hollywood-style act played out and 
directed by American intelligence." 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C) The mild backlash against Saddam's capture has more 
to do with local politicians' self-aggrandizement than any 
real depth of public support for the former dictator, or 
genuine desire to see Saddam return to power.  His arrest, 
however, provides an opportunity for local politicians and 
opposition leaders to tap into the very real unpopularity of 
U.S. regional policies, which continue to be perceived as 
inattentive to Arab interests. 
 
¶9.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman or access the site 
through the State Department's SIPRNET home page. 
GNEHM