This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 008225 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/16/2013 
TAGS: PGOV ECON KDEM KISL JO KTER
SUBJECT: JORDANIAN ISLAMIST LEADERS CALL FOR POLITICAL 
REFORM; REJECT PRIVATIZATION AND PRICE HIKES 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 07909 
     ¶B. AMMAN 07507 
     ¶C. AMMAN 07000 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) In recent press interviews, the leaders of the Muslim 
Brotherhood and the Islamic Action Front welcomed government 
dialogue efforts, but warned that they would judge the 
government by its actions, rather than its words.  The 
Islamists called for political reform, a new electoral law, 
and a stronger Parliament free of government control, while 
flatly rejecting privatization of state companies, tax hikes 
and/or price increases.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD "OPTIMISTIC" 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The "Controller General" of the Muslim Brotherhood 
(MB) in Jordan, Abul Majed Dhneibat, gave an interview 
published in the Arabic daily Al Rai on December 7.  As noted 
ref c, Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez had earlier paid a 
courtesy call on Dhneibat and met with members of the Islamic 
Action Front (the MB's political wing) as part of his 
wide-ranging efforts to establish dialogue with all sectors 
of Jordanian society. 
 
¶3.  (U) In the interview, Dhneibat said that he was "hopeful" 
about what he had heard from Fayez.  "I am optimistic, not 
pessimistic," stated Dhneibat.  He commended Fayez as having 
"an Islamic, Arab good nature" and of being "a good and 
attentive listener."  According to Dhneibat, the MB agreed 
with the government's call for political development and 
greater democracy (see ref b), and fully supported dialogue 
"as a means of getting us out of the numerous dilemmas that 
the previous governments have gotten us into with their 
policies."  Dhneibat further opined that dialogue should be 
marked by "transparency and respect for someone else's 
opinion." 
 
---------------- 
WORDS OF CAUTION 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Dhneibat mixed cautionary statements in with his 
conciliatory words.  He said that it was "unfortunate" that 
no Islamists had been appointed to the new Senate, and 
claimed that this was "a negative indicator and one that is 
not encouraging for political development."  He also feared 
that Islamist exclusion from the Senate was "part of a series 
of links to drive out the Islamic movement in this country 
despite the movement's obvious presence in the institutions 
of civil society." 
 
¶5.  (U)  While supporting talks with the government, Dhneibat 
said that the MB "does not want a dialogue with no objective" 
or one between "two deaf parties."  Political dialogue had to 
eventually result in change of the current one-person, 
one-vote electoral system, as well as provisions of the 
Municipalities Law providing for appointment, rather then 
election, of city mayors and up to half of city council 
members.  He called on the government to begin implementing 
Islamic law "gradually" as a way of "preserving the Arab, 
Islamic identity and defending our homeland from the Zionist 
grip that is threatening our future."  Dhneibat further asked 
that Jordan's trade unions/professional associations (which 
are dominated by anti-normalizers) be given the right to 
freely express themselves and engage in "political activity." 
 
 
----------------------- 
PRIVATIZE AT YOUR PERIL 
----------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Claiming that Jordan's "strength and independence" 
came from control of its "basic resources," particularly 
potash and cement, Dhneibat flatly rejected privatization of 
"strategic" state enterprises.  "Encroaching on these 
companies and selling them is considered to be an 
encroachment on the nation's independence," said Dhneibat. 
 
----------------------- 
IAF FLEXING ITS MUSCLES 
----------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) In a separate interview published December 8 in the 
Arabic daily al-Arab al-Yawm, IAF MP Azzam Al-Hnaidi (West 
Banker, Amman - 2nd District) discussed IAF goals in 
Parliament.  Claiming that "the government clearly interfered 
in the (Lower) House's work over the past period," Hnaidi 
said that the IAF backed Abdul Hadi Majali for Speaker (see 
ref a) after agreeing with him to strengthen Parliament's 
"prestige" and "independence."  According to Hnaidi, the IAF 
reached agreement with Majali over "administration" of Lower 
House sessions to better allow for discussion with ministers 
of "the demands of their constituencies." 
 
¶8.  (U) Hnaidi said that Majali also agreed to help amend 
current laws relating to "democracy, public liberties and the 
people's tribulation," including the Electoral Law and the 
Municipalities Law.  He denied reaching any understanding on 
HAMAS leaders deported from Jordan in 1999, saying, "We call 
for their return, but HAMAS was not mentioned in the 
agreement." 
 
¶9.  (U) Like Dhneibat, Hnaidi commended PM Fayez for his 
efforts at dialogue and for having "an open mind toward all 
the parties."  But he added that, "What counts is what takes 
place on the ground.  The previous government began with big 
(promises) . . but matters ran in the opposite direction. 
Achievements will be the judge."  Hnaidi welcomed further 
government dialogue, but warned that talks had to be "a 
two-way street" and that all agreements "should be 
implemented and not remain ink on paper." 
 
----------------------------------------- 
"YES" TO BUDGET CUTS, "NO" TO PRICE HIKES 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  (U) With respect to the economy, Hnaidi deemed the 
retention of ministers from the former government's economic 
team as "not an encouraging sign."  He called for a specific 
plan to reduce government expenses and cut the budget 
deficit, but without imposing new taxes or increasing prices. 
 "We warn the government against the consequences of taking 
any step that might raise prices or taxes," said Hnaidi, 
claiming that Jordanians "can no longer bear an increase in 
the price of any commodity."  Hnaidi further stated that the 
IAF would "strongly oppose the privatization of any big 
company in Jordan," and would continue to fight against 
privatizing the state phosphates company. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶11.  (C) Dhneibat's and Hnaidi's populist statements indicate 
that the Islamists will not quietly accept being sidelined by 
the new government.  We can expect them to become vocal if, 
after the current honeymoon period, PM Fayez fails to take 
action on their most important agenda items.  The Islamists 
are also trying to bolster their standing amongst ordinary 
Jordanians, many of whom are wary of their conservative 
social views, by grabbing onto popular opposition against a 
potential increase in commodity prices and/or the sales tax. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman or access the site 
through the State Department's SIPRNET home page. 
GNEHM