This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS RANGOON 000261 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS AID/ANE, HHS FOR OGHA - STEIGER 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV AND IO/IHA 
PHNOM PENH FOR AID - CAROL JENKINS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID SOCI ECON BM NGO
SUBJECT: NEW HEALTH MINISTER PROGRESSIVE ON VCT 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request for EAP/BCLTV.  Please see 
paragraph 7. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  The COM had a productive courtesy call on 
the new Health Minister, pressing him on expanded VCT, 
discussing an expected private health care law, and 
presenting the case for visits to Burma by Orbis and 
Operation Smile.  The Minister said he looked forward to 
future U.S.-Burma dialogue on VCT and humanitarian aid 
issues, and that he would try to be available when the USG 
delegation led by OES DAS Chow comes to Rangoon at the end of 
March.  End summary. 
 
Voluntary Counseling and Testing Progress Possible 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Chief of Mission paid a courtesy call on the new 
Health Minister, Dr. Kyaw Myint, on February 26.   From the 
outset of the meeting, it was clear the new Minister has 
taken a far more positive position on INGO participation in 
voluntary counseling and testing (VCT), than had his 
predecessor.  Responding to the COM's questions, the Minister 
said that the GOB would be willing to allow INGOs to provide 
VCT services for at-risk communities (including TB patients). 
 However, he agreed that, the devil was in the details.  He 
would not elaborate on what the outstanding details were, or 
how the GOB currently stood on them, but he did urge the U.S. 
government to send out someone to work out these details with 
the Ministry.  Along these lines, the Minister was curious 
why the CDC visit had been canceled, and said he looked 
forward to its return. 
 
Private Healthcare Soon to Be Legalized 
 
¶4. (SBU) When asked about the status of a long-awaited law 
legalizing private health care, the Minister turned to his 
deputies to respond.  They were evasive, saying only that the 
draft was in with the Attorney General's office, and that 
when it emerged it should be ready for promulgation.  The law 
will allow provision of health care by properly licensed and 
supervised private clinics and pharmacies (currently private 
clinics operate without official sanction).  The Minister's 
staff was vague on the matter of foreign participation in the 
new private health care sector.  However, the message seemed 
clear that foreigners would not be allowed to participate 
unless they were physicians licensed by the Myanmar Medical 
Association. 
 
Orbis, Operation Smile Welcome 
 
¶5. (U) The COM queried the Minister on the possibility of 
U.S.-based non-profits Orbis and Operation Smile coming to 
Burma.  The Minister replied that Orbis was "an old friend" 
and could come anytime (Note: Orbis was in Burma most 
recently in 2000).   He mentioned that there was already 
significant international assistance for cleft palate and 
facial reconstructive surgery, and that local doctors were 
also performing these operations for the poorest children. 
However, he said that Operation Smile should come to discuss 
with the MOH a possible visit to Burma.  The COM gave the 
Minister some background information on Operation Smile and 
Orbis and told him we would advise these organizations of his 
response. 
 
Looking for Help 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Minister volunteered the fact that Burma and the 
GOB desperately need additional international assistance and 
funding to effectively tackle the country's health-related 
priorities.  He said the small amount of such funding and 
advice to date have been major obstacles to success.  The 
Minister urged the United States to become more engaged, by 
exchanging proposals for areas of possible cooperation.  The 
COM responded that we expected a visit at the end of March of 
a USG delegation, led by OES DAS Chow, looking to discuss 
matters of health and humanitarian assistance.  The Minister 
responded that he would try to find time on his schedule to 
meet with the delegation. 
 
Action Request 
 
¶7. (SBU) For EAP/BCLTV:  Please contact Operation Smile and 
Orbis to relay the Minister's message.  Operation Smile, if 
interested in coming to Burma, should consider sending a 
representative to lay the groundwork with key MOH officials. 
Martinez