This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/STC HART, OES/ENV RICHARD, OES/PCI PAYNE, 
NEA/ARN ZIADEH 
DEPT PASS USAID EGAT WILSON 
DEPT PASS USTR FOR SAUMS 
DEPT PASS USEPA/OIA FERRANTE, PASAREW 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: TSPL SENV ETRD AMGT APER KSCA JO
SUBJECT:  JORDAN - REQUEST FOR 2003 EMBASSY SCIENCE 
FELLOW 
 
REF:  STATE 53545 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  Post welcomes the opportunity to further USG 
environmental and trade objectives in Jordan and requests 
an Embassy Science Fellow from EPA for up to three months 
during the summer of 2003.  The fellow will provide 
technical assistance to the recently created Ministry of 
Environment, particularly focusing on helping Jordan 
develop the most effective and efficient environmental 
regulatory agency.  All anticipated work and meetings 
with Jordanian officials could be conducted in English. 
(Please note that, because of regional security concerns, 
Embassy Amman is currently on authorized departure.  The 
security situation is under continuous review, and 
decisions about summer staffing will reflect an up-to- 
date assessment of the situation.)  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
CONTRIBUTING TO FTA ENVIRONMENTAL OBJECTIVES 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Environmental regulatory policy has become an 
increasingly important bilateral issue in the context of 
U.S. trade agreements.  To wit, the Jordan FTA has an 
annex and side agreement which obligate the parties to 
uphold and enforce existing environmental laws and 
regulations.  The Joint Environmental Forum, a component 
of the FTA environmental commitments, is expected to meet 
within the next few months to discuss how best to address 
the FTA obligations.  Some of those discussions will 
cover capacity-building needs of the new Ministry of 
Environment.  Having an EPA science fellow on the ground 
in Amman this coming summer would be an excellent 
opportunity to push forward our agenda.  Based on the 
Environmental Forum discussions, post's Environmental HUB 
office -- with input from the USAID Mission's water and 
economic opportunity offices -- will develop a detailed 
set of work objectives for the fellow. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
BUILDING JORDAN'S ENVIRONMENTAL CAPACITY 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Post is keen to recruit an EPA fellow to help advise 
the new Ministry of Environment on its mission, 
organizational structure, substantive components, budget 
allocations, human resources and capacity.  Additionally, 
the fellow could help Jordanian environment officials 
build effective working relationships with other 
Jordanian agencies with economic policy responsibilities. 
Taking a global look at the state of environmental 
governance in Jordan, the science fellow should have the 
general expertise necessary to counsel the government on 
how to structure an effective and efficient environmental 
regulatory body.  Perhaps drawing on EPA's experience in 
other developing countries seeking to build appropriate 
environment ministries, the fellow could offer some 
models Jordan may wish to consider. 
 
¶4.  The successful EPA candidate can also draw on a 
recent assessment of Jordan's environmental management 
capacity conducted by an USAID contractor to gain a 
better understanding of environmental governance in 
Jordan and to determine areas and issues that need the 
most immediate attention.  We would expect the EPA fellow 
to have daily contact with Jordanian Ministry of 
Environment personnel, as well as routine interaction 
with other government officials, members of Jordan's 
environmental NGO community and academics.  Meetings can 
be conducted in English. 
 
¶5.  With EPA's vast expertise in environmental regulation 
and enforcement, particularly the international work it 
has done to build the capacity of foreign environmental 
agencies, we expect our science fellow to bring unique 
and valuable consultations to Jordan, one of our most 
strategic partners in the Middle East.  Conversely, this 
fellowship offers the selected candidate an excellent 
opportunity for additional international experience, 
networking, and high-level policy dialog. 
 
--------------------- 
ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES 
--------------------- 
 
¶6.  Point of contact:  NEA Regional Environment Officer 
Paul Malik. 
Email:  malikp@state.gov 
Tel:  962-6-592-0101 ext 2621 
Fax:  962-7-592-7653 
Workweek is Sunday-Thursday 
 
¶7.  Office Space/Security Clearances:  Post can provide 
office space and unclassified computer access.  The 
science fellow is required to have a secret clearance for 
unescorted access within the embassy. 
 
¶8. Housing/Transportation:  Post will make an effort to 
offer embassy housing to the science fellow, utilizing a 
vacated apartment during the summer turnover season. 
However, post will have to confirm housing availability 
as the fellowship approaches. 
 
¶9. Embassy Services:  The science fellow will have access 
to post medical services, CLO, APO, check-cashing 
services, and for a fee can join AECSA-the recreational 
association-with access to the commissary, pool, and 
snack bar. 
 
Gnehm