This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001700 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KJUS PINR MOPS GT
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR AND HUMAN RIGHTS OMBUDSMAN DISCUSS 
VIOLENCE AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS WORKERS 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Ambassador Hamilton met with Human Rights 
Ombudsman Sergio Morales on June 26 to express concern over 
the recent murder of an Auxiliary Ombudsman and new threats 
against human rights defenders and journalists.  The 
Ambassador also praised Morales' efforts to promote the 
prompt establishment of an International Commission to 
Investigate Clandestine Groups (CICIACS).  After the meeting, 
the Ambassador condemned the murder and intimidation in 
comments to the press.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) On June 26, the Ambassador and HROff met with Human 
Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales to express condolences for 
the recent murder of Chimaltenango Auxiliary Ombudsman Israel 
Lopez.  The Ambassador also expressed concern to Morales 
about threats against fourteen other auxiliary Ombudsmen, and 
briefed the Ombudsman about USG diplomatic efforts to urge 
the GOG to protect the Ombudsman and human rights defenders. 
The Ambassador pledged further moral and technical support. 
Morales thanked the Ambassador for all of his efforts and 
said that USG assistance is an important pillar of support 
for human rights work in Guatemala.  Morales also praised 
newly-named prosecutor Thelma de Lam for the excellent job 
she is doing of investigating the Lopez murder. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador expressed our concern over the June 
24 domestic break-in and threatening of El Periodico 
publisher Jose Ruben Zamora.  Morales agreed that this was a 
troubling incident that merited a quick and thorough 
investigation, which he and his staff were doing their best 
to provide.  Morales also mentioned that six different 
journalists had been threatened in different parts of the 
country over the previous 72 hours, and that he was worried 
about them as well. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Morales said he hoped the new wave of violence 
against human rights activists, journalists, and justice 
operators would justify the human rights community's urgency 
to see the commission to investigate clandestine groups 
(CICIACS) established quickly.  Morales said that he, Foreign 
Minister Gutierrez, and human rights leaders were looking 
forward to UN Rep Predendergrast's visit on July 4, as well 
as the UN technical mission in mid-July.  The Ambassador 
commended Morales' leadership on the CICIACS and reiterated 
USG support for the expeditious establishment of CICIACS. 
 
¶5. (U) In statements to the press on departure from the 
Ombudsman's office, the Ambassador condemned the murder of 
Auxiliary Ombudsman Israel Lopez and called for a thorough 
investigation.  He said that the international community 
remains concerned over the intimidation of human rights 
workers, and expressed the hope that the Government would 
bring to justice those who are making these threats. 
LINDWALL