This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS LAGOS 002379 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR AF/PD AMIRTHANAYAGAM, AF/W CFULLER, AF/W DEPSTEIN 
ABUJA FOR PAS, POL 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO NI KISL
SUBJECT:  Engaging Islam in Southern Nigeria. 
 
Ref: Abuja 001949. 
 
 
¶1.   Summary:  Working closely with PAS, post engaged the 
southern Muslim community on the "Shared Meaning of Ramadan 
and Thanksgiving" and hosted an Iftaar dinner for Muslim 
community leaders. 
 
 
¶2.   The Media Message:  During Ramadan, ConGen Lagos 
reached out to southern Nigeria's Muslim community through 
both live and taped radio talk shows, distribution of post- 
produced publications, roundtable discussions with print 
media and interviews for broadcast news.  Post targeted 
local language media outlets and Muslim-focused broadcast 
shows, in addition to a nationally syndicated television 
talk show.  To improve its outreach, post utilized high- 
ranking post staff like the Consul General as well as a 
Muslim spouse who has lived in America and an officer who 
used Yoruba to multiply the message. 
 
 
¶3.   Post has already seen media coverage of one-half of 
these engagements and expects the balance to appear by 
November 28.  By that time, post's message will have reached 
millions of Nigerians, including the large Hausa Muslim 
community in Lagos, the middle-class Yoruba Muslim community 
of Lagos and the Yoruba Muslim community in Ibadan that is 
often seen as the leadership of the southwestern Nigerian 
Muslims. 
 
 
¶4.   Post's message focused on the shared meaning of Ramadan 
and Thanksgiving.  Beyond the coincidence of timing this 
year, Post highlighted the values of charity, reflection, 
family and -- ultimately -- celebration that characterize 
the two holidays.  Using this positive message as a 
springboard, Post staff discussed the practice of Islam in 
America, particularly the enshrined freedoms of a 
multicultural group to practice its faith as it wishes. 
Staff discussed the formal laws that protect freedom of 
religion in America, as well as the increasing realization 
that there is a need to better understand Islam through 
informal channels like President Bush's Iftaar dinners. 
 
 
¶5.   Moving to foreign policy, staff stressed that the war 
on terrorism is not a war on Islam and highlighted President 
Bush's own statements from September 17, 2001 on the need to 
disassociate the two ideas.  This being Nigeria, inevitably 
discussions also turned to visas.  Staff had the opportunity 
to clarify many misconceptions about US visa policy.  They 
addressed the fact that visa policies have become stricter 
across the board since September 11, regardless of religion, 
but that Muslim applicants are not singled out or refused 
NIVs based on name, religion, or the number of wives they 
have.  Lastly, staff highlighted the cooperation between 
Nigeria and the USG to fight terrorism and support an open 
democracy. 
 
 
 
 
¶6.   Iftaar Dinner:  In addition to the public outreach, the 
CG hosted the third annual Itaar dinner on November 12.  The 
Secretary General of the Nigerian Supreme Consul for Islamic 
 
SIPDIS 
Affairs observed that each dinner has been better and more 
relaxed than the last.  (Comment: Indeed, the first CG 
hosted dinners were a bit stilted with invitees wondering 
about the sincerity of the invitation.  However, ongoing 
contacts with the Islamic community throughout the year has 
engendered a genuine spirit of shared interests.  End 
comment.) 
 
 
¶7.   Comment Continued:  After all of the media and Iftaar 
events, participants expressed a genuine desire for more 
outreach and more information about one another's policies 
and practices.  Post intends to host many more encounters 
with southern Nigeria's Islamic community throughout the 
year. 
 
 
HINSON-JONES