This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002567 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/07/2013 
TAGS: KDEM PHUM PGOV RS NL
SUBJECT: DUTCH RESPONSE TO CHECHNYA ELECTION 
 
REF: A. STATE 283165 
     ¶B. GOLDING - MORROW ET. AL. EMAIL 10/06/03 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Mary E. Daly for reasons 1.5 (b and 
d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: PolOff delivered demarche points on the 
Chechnya election (ref A) to Dutch MFA OSCE Task Force Senior 
Policy Officer Robert-Jan Siegert on October 6, 2003. 
Siegert said the Dutch agree with U.S. points, but the Dutch 
position varies slightly. He noted FM de Hoop Scheffer, in 
his capacity as OSCE Chair, refrained from saying the 
election fell short of international standards during 
yesterday's October 6 press conference in Warsaw, opting to 
instead ennumerate the problems but withold final judgement 
until results are in.  During the meeting, the Dutch shared 
with PolOff a "very confidential" EU draft statement on the 
Chechnya election (ref B) to be discussed today during the 
COEST and PSC meetings in Brussels. (Note: see paragraph 4 
for draft text).  Siegert said the EU concensus on Chechnya 
is "much more critical" than one year ago, and belives this 
is due to EU partners feeling less optimistic now that a 
reconciliation is possible in the near future.  End Summary 
 
¶2. (C) PolOff delivered demarche points on Chechnya election 
(ref A) to Dutch MFA OSCE Task Force Senior Policy Officer 
Robert-Jan Siegert.  Siegert said the Dutch agree with U.S. 
points, and have been engaged in an intensive effort to 
coordinate an EU approach.  He noted the Friday, October 3, 
conversation between Ambassador Daan Everts and A/S Beth 
Jones as part of this effort.  Siegert said the Dutch 
position differs slightly from the U.S., pointing to FM de 
Hoop Scheffer's statement at yesterday's October 6 press 
conference in Warsaw.  Speaking as the OSCE Chair, de Hoop 
Scheffer said there were a number of problems with the 
election, including the lack of independent media, and the 
withdrawal of legitimate candidates prior to voting.  He 
urged the Russians to "enagage in a meaningful policy that 
would bring about reconciliation," one that must include an 
improvement in the human rights situation and rule of law, as 
well as a condemnation of any form of violence.  FM De Hoop 
Scheffer said he hoped the OSCE would be able to contribute 
to the process of reconcilation on the ground in Chechnya. 
Siegert noted FM de Hoop Scheffer stopped short of saying the 
elections did not meet international standards, but chose to 
say instead that it was difficult to judge at this stage 
because ODIHR was not able to monitor the election process 
and the final results are not yet in. 
 
¶3. (C) During the meeting, the Dutch shared with PolOff a 
"very confidential" EU draft statement on the Chechnya 
election (ref B).  The statement was drafted by Germany, 
commented on by France, and circulated informally to various 
EU partners.  According to the Dutch, the draft statement, 
included below in paragraph 4, will be discussed October 7 in 
Brussels during the COEST meeting, and most likely concluded 
at the PSC meeting the same day.  Siegert believes the final 
draft should not be that different from de Hoop Scheffer's 
statement during the Warsaw press conference, but cautioned 
that it is sometimes hard to tell with the EU.  Siegert said 
the EU concensus on Chechnya is "much more critical" than one 
year ago, and belives this is due to EU partners feeling less 
optimistic now that a reconciliation is possible in the near 
future. 
 
¶4. (C) DRAFT EU DECLARATION ON PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS IN 
CHECHNYA 
¶I.  The EU takes note of the holding of presidential 
elections in Chechnya/Russian Federation on October 5, 2003 
and its preliminary results as presented by...(Presidency 
would have to add official Russian language). 
II.  The EU has made clear on numerous occasions that it 
supports all genuine efforts to attain a lasting peace in 
Chechnya. (presidential declaration of 26.09.03,ROM/0912/03) 
It urged all parties to the conflict to end violence 
immediately.  Furthermore, the EU called for a political 
solution to the conflict.  The EU and Russia in their Joint 
Statement at the Summit in St. Petersburg on May, 31,2003 
expressed the hope that the recently started political 
process as well as the economic and social reconstruction 
would lead to the restoration of the rule of law, thus 
promoting the protection of human rights and to a genuine 
reconciliation in Chechnya. 
(Joint Statement St. Petersburg). 
III.  Against this background the EU followed the electoral 
process in Chechnya with great attention.  It underlined that 
it was of paramount importance that the population of 
Chechnya - including those temporarily displaced - recognizes 
the legitimacy of elections.  (presidential declaration of 
26.09.03,ROM/0912/03).  However, the EU had to note with 
great concern negative developments in the run-up to the 
presidential elections in Chechnya, in particular the lack of 
real pluralism of candidatures to the presidency, the absence 
of independent media in Chechnya as well as the deplorable 
security situation in the area. 
IV.  Applying accepted OSCE/ODIHR standards to assess the 
conduct and the results of the presidential elections in 
Chechnya the EU expresses serious doubts that these elections 
can be called free and fair.  The EU therefore, once more, 
urges the Russian authorities to investigate all indications 
of the intimidation of candidates and allegations of the 
manipulation of the electoral process.  The EU is not 
convinced that the elections just held hold sufficient 
credibility with the population of Chechnya to advance the 
process towards a political settlement and could even set 
that process back.  (language used by US-DASS Pifer) 
¶V.  The EU appreciated the Russian Government's commitments 
entered into before the referendum concerning the improvement 
of living conditions, and amnesty, autonomy provisions, 
compensation for destroyed property and the restoration of 
the rule of law.  Regrettably, results achieved in these 
fields so far are insufficient.  Substantial progress to a 
peaceful life in Chechnya is still lacking.  In particular, 
reports about ongoing human rights violations continue to be 
an issue of the gravest concern to the EU.  (language used by 
DASS Pifer) 
VI.  The EU once again would like to express its hope that 
verbal commitments will be followed by their implementation, 
that immediate serious action will contribute to a 
significant improvement of the human rights situation in 
Chechnya and will bridge the divide between the bridge the 
divide between the Russian authorities and the population of 
Chechnya.  (declaration of ODIHR-director Strohal of 28.03.) 
The EU urges the Russian authorities to do their utmost to 
advance a genuine political process and bring peace and 
stability to Chechnya (OSCE declaration).  It calls upon the 
Russian Government to intensify its cooperation with 
international organisations as agreed in the EU-Russia Joint 
Statement at St. Petersburg. 
VII.  The EU appreciated the opportunity given by the Russian 
Government to the Special Representative of the Secretary 
General of the United Nations for displaced people, Mr. 
Francis Deng, for visiting camps of refugees in Ingushetia. 
The EU views with concern the situation of refugees in the 
North Caucasus and condemns all attempts to put pressure on 
them in order to make them return to Chechnya on a coercive 
or involuntary basis. 
VIII.  The EU reaffirms that it recognizes the territorial 
integrity of the Russian Federation as well as its right to 
combat terrorism.  The EU condemns any kind of violence, in 
particular terrorist acts which have repeatedly caused the 
death of numerous innocent lives in different parts of the 
Russian Federation and which endanger the prospects for a 
political solution.  (partly: Joint Statement St. Petersburg) 
The EU is convinced that a genuine political settlement of 
the conflict in Chechnya based on reconciliation and the 
effective protection of human rights forms a key element for 
an eradication of terrorism in the area. 
 
SOBEL