This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ABUJA 001679 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR AF/PD, AF/W, AF/RA, IIP/G/AF, IIP/T/D, HR, 
IIP/T/GIC, IIP/T/PS, IIP/T/SV 
LAGOS FOR PAS, POL, ECON, FAS, FCS, DAO, FBI, USSS, DEA, 
CONS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS KPAO NI OEXC OIIP OPRC
SUBJECT: USAID SUCCESS STORIES SURPRISE NIGERIANS, COUNTER 
ANTI-AMERICAN VIEWS: PART ONE 
 
Ref: State 93896 
 
 
¶1.  Summary. Nigerians reacting to Mission-sponsored media 
reports June - September 2003 on U.S.-Nigeria partnership 
successes on health, HIV/AIDS, agriculture, education, and 
conflict resolution, say they are amazed at the level of 
support given to Nigeria by the U.S. Government.  They 
expressed similar sentiments on their assessment of media 
reports on the Ambassador's Self-Help and the Ambassador's 
Girl Scholarship programs, as well as the Widernet's 
university interconnectivity program.  The positive impact 
of the success stories was clearly evident during the 
recent defeat of stiff conservative northern opposition to 
the August polio vaccination rounds.  Reactions have been 
very positive on USAID's contributions towards revival of 
agriculture, especially gum arabic trade, and the LEAP 
program to upgrade primary educational standards in 
northern Nigeria.  The Basketball for Peace Project is 
another success story that Nigerians say they value greatly 
because the program targets jobless youths in the crisis- 
prone Kaduna State.  Radio listeners, television viewers 
and Hausa readers in 19 northern States, including 
conservative Muslim radicals in Nasarawa, Kano, Kaduna, 
Sokoto, Katsina, Borno, Plateau, Zamfara, and Jigawa 
States, say the success stories surprised them because they 
never knew the U.S. was doing so much for Nigeria. 
Hopefully, these images may change some of their negative 
views about the U.S.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY: Between June and September 
2003, the Embassy's Public Affairs Section facilitated a 
series of radio, television and print success stories on 
national, regional and local media, promoting American 
generosity, and countering anti-American views in 
conservative Muslim communities in northern Nigeria.  The 
project was implemented with IIP and PA funding (reftel). 
This is a preliminary report.  Reactions to the success 
stories are still being received, and more media reports on 
other programs, including HIV/AIDS and the Ambassador's 
Girl Scholarship programs, are still being aired.  PAS 
Lagos is still compiling a report.  These will be reported 
separately. 
 
 
¶3.  Success Stories coverage by Category: 
 
 
HEALTH: Polio 
------------- 
 
 
TELEVISION: 
August 17-September 11, 2003, (60-second) polio eradication 
jingle (60 slots) in Hausa on Katsina State Radio, using 
materials provided by USAID to explain examples of success 
including small pox. 
 
 
August 26, 2003, "Polio Eradication: A shared 
responsibility" (25-minute National Television (NTA) 
Documentary, featured USAID's Nigerian Health partners' 
countering allegations by some Muslim leaders that the 
polio vaccine contains birth control medicationto reduce 
northern Muslim populations. 
 
 
September 6, 11, and 13, 2003, "Nigerian Expert says Polio 
vaccine is safe, USAID deserves praise for leading the 
social mobilization strategy to eradicate polio in the 
north" (25-minute news documentary on Sokoto State 
Television, featured interviews with USAID, UNICEF and WHO 
representatives. 
 
 
September 10, 2003, "Polio can render the child invalid for 
life" (5-minute news report in English and Hausa on Sokoto 
State Television, featured USAID's Kano office coordinator, 
Halima Ben Umar, explaining that the Agency's effort is to 
ensure polio eradication as part of a global campaign, not 
population control.  She emphasized that among other 
things, the USAID is working with local government 
mobilization committees on advocacy and sensitivitytraining 
for town criers, vaccinators and district coordinators. 
 
 
September 10, 2003, "Muslim viral expert debunks 
allegations of impurities in the polio vaccine" (5-minute 
news report and interview in English and Hausa on Katsina 
State Television.  The report featured Dr. Hassan 
Rafindadi, a Muslim Consultant Pathologist, who had 
conducted an independent analysis of the polio vaccine, and 
pronounced it safe and free from any impurities or HIV 
virus. 
 
 
September 11, 2003, "Sokoto State Governor changes mind on 
polio vaccination" (5-minute report on National Television 
NTA, featured Sokoto State Governor pledging support for 
the polio program.  The report also featured USAID's Garba 
Abdu, emphasizing the USAID's other Health contributions to 
ensure the survival of the Nigerian child. 
 
 
September 12, 2003, "Immunize your children, traditional 
rulers tell their communities" (60-second follow-up news 
report in English and Hausa on Sokoto State Television, in 
reaction to USAID story on polio eradication mobilization 
efforts. 
 
 
September 15, 2003, "Immunization, the sure way forward" 
(25-minute documentary on National Television (NTA), 
praising USAID contributions to child survival programs, 
including polio eradication efforts in Nigeria. 
 
 
RADIO: 
August 17  eptember 11, 2003, (60-second) polio 
eradication jingle (80 slots) in Hausa on Katsina State 
Radio, using materials provided by USAID and voices of 
traditional rulers to explain examples of success including 
small pox. 
 
 
September 9, 2003, "Zamfara Local Government Chairman 
praises USAID contributions to polio eradication in 
northern Nigeria" (5-minute news report on Zamfara State 
Radio, a Shari'a State and northern Nigeria's most 
consistent critic of U.S. programs and policies.  The 
report featured government officials and community leaders 
acknowledging USAID's generosity, and the good work other 
donor agencies had done with their Nigerian partners in the 
Health sector. 
 
 
September 16, 2003, "Yaro Masomin Babba" (child survival) 
(26-minute Hausa language program, repeated twice) on the 
north's most-listened to radio station FRCN Kaduna, 
featured USAID contributions to child survival in Nigeria, 
including polio eradication effort. 
 
 
September 10, 2003, "Your children stand a risk of 
permanent disability" (2-minute news report, featured 
Sokoto State Chief Medical Director urging parents to 
participate fully in the polio eradication campaign as 
follow-up reaction to USAID success story on polio. 
 
 
PRINT: 
August 22, 2003 "Al-Mizan," (first segment, full-page 
articles in Hausa) "The truth about polio," "Polio vaccine 
is safe says USAID, featured the most balanced report ever 
written by the most anti-American newspaper in the north. 
PAS Abuja provided USAID's background materials on polio 
and an interview with USAID's Garba Abdu on the agency's- 
led child survival success in northern Nigeria, which 
countered allegations that the polio vaccine contains 
impurities including birth control substances and HIV 
virus. 
 
 
September 12, 2003' "Al-Mizan," (second segment, full-page 
articles in Hausa) "Polio vaccine is safe says USAID," "We 
have not seen any evidence of harm in the polio vaccine 
says Muslim cleric Sheikh Sanusi Gumbi," used materials 
provided by USAID, including the agency's success in other 
child survival advocacy programs. 
 
 
September 14, 2003, "Gaskiya Ta Fi Kwabo," (2-page 
interview with USAID's Garba Abdu in Hausa) entitled "USAID 
polio success, history of the disease," featured background 
materials provided by PAS Abuja and USAID. 
 
 
IMPACT:  A positive response to the August polio 
immunization rounds, a better understanding of USAID 
contributions to polio success, and a change of attitude by 
some prominent northern religious leaders and institutions 
that were initially opposed to the program.  Sheikh Sanusi 
Gumbi, a well-respected Muslim cleric based in Kaduna said 
in an extensive interview after the polio success story ran 
in Al-Mizan (9/12), "We have not seen any evidence of harm 
in the Polio Vaccine.  America is doing a wonderful job 
helping the world's needy.  It cannot spend its money just 
to harm children through the polio immunization program. 
We should all commend its contributions to our national 
development, especially the eradication of other dangerous 
diseases such as small pox."  Zamfara State Health 
Commissioner, Alhaji Mohammed Tukur, changed his earlier 
opposition to the polio program.  He commended USAID, 
UNICEF, WHO and other International implementing partners, 
and asked Zamfara citizens to cooperate.  (Zamfara was the 
first northern State to ask its citizens not to participate 
in the polio vaccination exercise) 
 
 
EDUCATION: Literacy Enhancement Assistance Program (LEAP) 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
TELEVISION: 
August 19, 2003, (3-minute Kano State Television news 
reports in English and Hausa), featured community leaders 
commending USAID-assisted LEAP program in Kano State with a 
sound bite stating, "it will make generations responsible 
and worthy ambassadors of the society." 
 
 
August 20, 2003, (5-minute Kano State Television news 
reports in English and Hausa) on LEAP's Literacy and 
Numeracy Agenda and the Local Government Authority Fora in 
Tsanyawa and Municipal Local Government areas of Kano 
 
SIPDIS 
State. 
 
 
August 20, 2003, (5-minute Nasarawa State Television news 
report on LEAP success in Doma Local Government area, 
featured Speaker of Nasarawa State House of Assembly 
commending the USG for "re-kindling hope in our children's 
future."  The Speaker donated two motorcycles for school 
inspection in appreciation of LEAP students' achievements. 
 
 
August 25, 2003, (3-minute National Television (NTA) news 
feature) on rural-based program "Grassroots," featured 
USAID's Melinda Taylor in a remote village school providing 
background, funding details and Nigerian partnership 
information on LEAP to local community and the PTA 
leadership in Nasarawa State. 
 
 
August 28, 2003, "LEAPing into the future," (5-minute NTA 
Network News report) on LEAP success, featured students in 
Doma Local Government primary schools demonstrating their 
LEAP-motivated literacy and numeracy skills to the 
admiration of their satisfied teachers and parents. 
 
 
RADIO 
August 20, 2003, (5-minute Nasarawa Broadcasting Service 
News report) on LEAP success in Doma Local Government area, 
featured Speaker of Nasarawa State House of Assembly 
commending USAID's LEAP success and urging community 
leaders to support the program by donating funds and 
materials in appreciation just as he did with the donation 
of two motorcycles for school inspection. 
 
 
PRINT: 
August 19, 2003, "New Nigerian," (a quarter page article) 
background and funding information on LEAP) with materials 
provided by USAID, and LEAP implementing partners, 
Education Development Center (EDC), World Education 
International (WEI), and Research Triangle Institute (RTI). 
 
 
August 26, 2003, "New Nigerian," (half page) "NGOs want 
LEAP to cover vocational training," featured interviews 
with NGGO leaders commending LEAP success and contributions 
to "unprecedented" enrolment figures in Kano schools. 
 
 
September 2, 2003, "New Nigerian," (Full page, special 
report) entitled "LEAPing over illiteracy hurdle," featured 
LEAP participating teachers testimonies that LEAP has 
improved the quality of teaching in the benefiting schools. 
 
 
IMPACT:  The impact of the LEAP success is summed up in the 
words of Speaker of the Nasarawa State House of Assembly, 
Mohammed Ogoshi Onawo, during the Assembly's session on 
August 22, in response to the story carried the previous 
day by the Nasarawa State Broadcasting Service.  He said, 
"Three years ago I was very worried about the future of 
education, especially in Doma Local Government.  However, 
what I have seen and heard about LEAP yesterday has given 
me the assurance that the future of LEAP students is 
bright.  We are therefore challenged to secure that bright 
future and replicate it in other schools within Nasarawa 
State through appropriate legislation." "Time and history 
will not erase this from our memory" said Alhaji Alhassan 
Abdullahi, a parent at Fadimatu Islamiyya School, Kano, 
referring to the LEAP program on a call-in program on Radio 
Kano (8/23).  NTA reporter, Moji Makanjuola, said that 
since she did the story, NTA has received several requests 
from parents who want their children relocated to USAID- 
assisted LEAP schools. 
 
 
AGRICULTURE: 
------------ 
 
 
GUM ARABIC PROGRAM 
RADIO: 
September 6, 2003, (2-minute news report in English and 
Hausa) on Radio Kano, featured Coordinator of USAID- 
assisted Gum Arabic Program, Yakasai, commending USAID for 
creating new hope in agribusiness for northern farmers and 
Gum Arabic exporters. 
 
 
September 7 & 8, 2003, (5-minute, lead story in English and 
Hausa) on FRCN Kaduna, reported, as a "USG-assisted 
agricultural revolution in the north" by northern Nigeria's 
most-listened to radio station. 
 
 
PRINT: 
September 6, 2003, "Weekly Trust," (5-inch story with News 
Agency (NAN) report), featured Bello Dantata, Assistant 
National Secretary of the National Association of Gum 
Arabic Producers and Processors of Nigeria, in a story 
entitled "Nigeria exports 11,000 tons of Gum Arabic." 
Dantata praised USAID for the success of the Gum Arabic 
Program, adding, "The program has helped Nigerian gum 
arabic producers gain acceptability in the world market." 
 
 
September 8, 2003, "The Triumph'" (5-inch story with News 
Agency (NAN) report) "Nigeria exports 11,000 tons of Gum 
Arabic," success attributed to USAID-assisted Gum Arabic 
Program. 
 
 
SEED AND FOOD SECURITY PROGRAM 
RADIO: 
September 7 & 8, 2003, (5-minute, lead story) on FRCN 
Kaduna in English and Hausa, featured field interviews with 
local farmers overwhelmed with joy overtheir USAID- 
increased agricultural incomes, and surprised that America 
cares even for small-holder farmers like them. 
 
 
PRINT: 
September 8, 2003, "The Triumph," (bold-caption, quarter 
page story) "USAID to boost Agriculture in Nigeria" with 
quotes from USAID's Andrew Levin, "We at the USAID realize 
that in order for Nigeria to grow economically, agriculture 
is the sector where there is an ample opportunity and 
chance to boost the economy, to improve food security, and 
generate broader economic growth." 
 
 
August 27, 2003, "The Path," (half page) report entitled 
"USAID boosts agriculture in Nigeria, featured statement by 
USAID Mission Director, Dawn Liberi, during a courtesy call 
on Nigeria's Agriculture Minister, and background on USAID- 
Nigeria agricultural partnership success. 
 
 
IMPACT:  Outpouring appreciation and gratitude to the U.S. 
for a rescue program.  FRCN Kaduna reporter, Dhiru Sani 
Mohammed, said the station has received several calls from 
listeners expressing surprise at the level of U.S. support 
for Nigeria's agriculture.  He said most of the callers 
also asked for information on how to participate in the Gum 
Arabic and food security programs. 
 
 
CONFLICT RESOLUTION: Basketball for Peace Program 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
TELEVISION: 
June 21, 2003, (5-minute report) on Nigerian Television 
(NTA) Kaduna, reported as a major U.S. contribution to 
peaceful elections in the 2003 Nigeria elections in the 
region. 
 
 
June 28, 2003, (5-minute report) on National Television 
(NTA) Network News, featured in three different news 
segments, including prime time news at 9 pm, reported as a 
major U.S. contribution to conflict resolution, and 
peaceful elections in 2003 by keeping restive jobless 
youths "creatively" engaged. 
 
 
PRINT: 
June 11, 2003, "The Path," (quarter page story) captioned 
"Basketball for idle youths," featured background provided 
by USAID and photo of the April 17 competition with the 
youths at the Embassy compound. 
 
 
IMPACT:  Overwhelmingly positive.  NTA Kaduna sports 
reporter, Anthony Forson, described the Basketball for 
Peace Program as "a major U.S. contribution to peaceful 
elections in the 2003 polls in Kaduna State, a state prone 
to religious and electoral violence.  The National 
Secretary of Youth Sports Federation of Nigeria (YSFON), 
 
SIPDIS 
Abdulrazaq Suleiman, told NTA that he wants USAID to 
introduce the same concept in other sports.  Youths in 
Kafanchan, another violence-prone town in southern Kaduna 
State, want to join the Basketball for Peace Program. 
 
 
WIDERNET: University Connectivity Program 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
TELEVISION: 
August 19, 2003, (5-minute news report) on Plateau State 
Television, featured shots of donated computers, and 
interviews on the impact the WIDERNET program has made to 
IT knowledge at the benefiting universities, and its effect 
on the university as a better learning environment. 
 
 
August 21, 2003, (4-minute news report) on National 
Television (NTA) prime time Network News at 9 pm, featured 
shots of donated computers at the University of Ibadan, and 
comments on the program's benefits to the university 
community. 
 
 
August 24, 2003, (5-minute news report) on National 
Television (NTA) prime time Network News at 9 pm, featured 
WIDERNET donated computers to University of Jos, and 
interviews with faculty commending WIDERNET for the 
initiative and the difference it has made to learning at 
the university. 
 
 
RADIO: 
July 29, 2003, (5-minute news report) on FRCN Ibadan 
channel, featured background information on the WIDERNET 
program, and interviews with Professor Fagbemi, describing 
the program as an excellent innovation that has benefited 
the university community immensely. 
 
 
August 19, 2003, (2-minute news report) on Plateau Radio, 
featured background materials provided by WIDERNET, and 
interviews with Professor Liverpool, Coordinator of the Jos 
program. 
 
 
IMPACT:  Overwhelming.  PAS Coordinator of the Nigerian- 
America Information Initiative (NAII), Dalhatu Hamza, said 
he received several calls from university administrators 
around the country commending the WIDERNET success as "an 
excellent innovation."  Professor Njoku and Professor Uvah, 
both Directors at the National Universities Commission 
(NUC) requested extension of the WIDERNET program to other 
Nigerian universities. 
 
 
¶4.  Results: Unprecedented and highly positive. It has 
established better linkages between the Nigerian media and 
USG agencies operating in Nigeria, which we hope will 
continue in the future. 
 
 
Comment: The success story initiative has gone far to 
broaden Nigerian public awareness regarding the scope of 
U.S. government assistance efforts in Nigeria.  We also 
successfully used the initiative to facilitate greater 
public focus on the lingering resistance to polio 
eradication efforts in northern Nigeria.  The lack of an 
effective government media and public education campaign 
has played a role in the continuing prevalence of polio and 
lack of public acceptance in some states.  The Mission's 
polio programs underscored USG financial support to the 
multilateral eradication program underway in Nigeria, but 
also provided the public with reliable medical information 
to counter the claims that the vaccine is unsafe, or may 
contain family planning medication or the HIV/AIDS virus. 
We are still compiling response information from media 
outlets who have run success stories, and will send in a 
follow-on cable.  End comment. 
 
 
MEECE