This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L YEREVAN 002803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/CACEN, EUR/ACE, INR 
EUR/CACEN FOR EUGENIA SIDEREAS 
NSC FOR MATTHEW BRYZA 
ANKARA FOR COB BLAHA 
 
E.O. 12958: 11/23/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU AM
SUBJECT:  GOAM OFFERS CONDOLENCES TO TURKEY AFTER ISTANBUL 
TERRORIST ATTACKS 
 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Ambassador John Ordway for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
¶2. (C) Summary:  The GOAM responded to the November 20 
terrorist attacks in Istanbul with a public statement of 
condemnation, followed by a telephone call by Armenian FM 
Oskanian to Turkish FM Gul on November 22.  The attacks, 
which attracted wide coverage in the local media and among 
everyday Armenians, were of particular interest to the GOAM 
given the large Armenian community in Istanbul and the 
initial press reports of damage to the Armenian Marmara 
Cultural Institute near the HSBC building.  The lead-up to 
the GOAM response (which only took place late November 21 
after FM Oskanian returned to Armenia from his travel to 
Kyrgyzstan) confirmed the active role Oskanian plays in the 
evolving Armenia-Turkey relationship.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
PUBLIC STATEMENT OFFERS CONDOLENCES 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The GOAM released a public statement the evening of 
November 21 condemning the recent terrorist attacks on the 
British Consulate and HSBC bank building in Istanbul. 
Note:  The statement was the first time the GOAM had 
reached out to Turkey in such a public fashion since the 
August 1999 earthquake in Turkey.  End note.  The attacks, 
which attracted wide coverage in the local media and among 
everyday Armenians, were of particular interest to the GOAM 
given the large Armenian community in Istanbul and the 
initial press reports of damage to the Armenian Marmara 
Cultural Institute near the HSBC building.  The November 22 
press release follows: 
 
Begin text:  The Republic of Armenia strongly condemns the 
terrorist acts which took place in Turkey, and which 
resulted in great human loss and destruction.  We express 
our sincere sympathies and condolences to the families of 
the victims, and to the governments and peoples of Turkey 
and the United Kingdom.  The Republic of Armenia 
unequivocally joins the international battle against 
terrorism which knows no borders and does not discriminate 
among nations and religions.  Terror acts in Turkey pose a 
threat to all humanity.  End text. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
OSKANIAN-GUL CALL FORMAL "BUT FRIENDLY" 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) In addition to the public statement, FM Oskanian 
made the rare move of calling Turkish FM Gul November 22 to 
express the GOAM's condolences.  The MFA told us that the 
call lasted ten minutes, had a "protocolary but friendly" 
tone, but did not include any offer for humanitarian 
support.  The call was the first time the two FMs had 
spoken since their meeting on the margins of UNGA in 
September.  The MFA Turkish Desk confirmed that Oskanian 
wanted to send the GOT a message that the GOAM "understands 
domestic tragedies and expects the Government of Turkey to 
do its part to fight terrorists."  Oskanian reportedly told 
MFA colleagues following the telephone call that the 
attacks must not unduly postpone the GOAM's ongoing 
dialogue with the GOT regarding opening the Armenia-Turkey 
border. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment:  The process leading up to the GOAM 
response confirmed the active role Oskanian plays in the 
Armenia-Turkey relationship.  High and mid-level officials 
inside the MFA and the President's Office were unwilling to 
move on this issue until Oskanian returned from his trip to 
Kyrgyzstan.  Oskanian's role is so central in this issue 
that the GOAM preferred to let the condolence message go 
out two days after the fact rather than change regular 
interlocutors and risk interrupting the evolving 
relationship between the two countries. 
 
ORDWAY