This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001143 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:   DECL: 07-01-13 
TAGS: PREL PTER PINS NO JA CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Sri Lanka:  Peace process poised to enter new 
phase 
 
Refs:  (A) Oslo 1298, and previous 
 
       (B) Colombo 1121, and previous (notal) 
 
(U) Classified by Donald Camp, Charge d'Affaires. 
Reasons 1.5 (b, d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  With the prime minister back from a 
successful visit to the United Kingdom, Sri Lanka's 
peace process is on the verge of entering a new phase. 
The Tigers are hinting at a return to talks, while the 
government is preparing an interim administration 
proposal.  The Liberation Tigers' of Tamil Eelam 
(LTTE's) political leader Thamilchelvam told the 
Japanese ambassador on June 30 that the LTTE sought to 
respond positively.  These developments, however, take 
place in an atmosphere of continued Tiger violence and 
tension in the south.  END SUMMARY. 
 
POSITIVE TIGER HINTS 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Recent actions by the Tigers continue to 
indicate a possible thaw in their hardline stance 
towards the government's efforts to resume peace 
negotiations.  As previously reported, June 23 comments 
by LTTE theoretician Anton Balasingham about a possible 
resumption of talks followed his London meeting -- the 
first since Tokyo -- with Norwegian facilitators.  Since 
then, the Tigers have continued to reach out to the 
international community, finally accepting a Japanese 
offer to brief them on the Tokyo conference.  (Note: 
Efforts by the Japanese to visit both the Tigers in the 
Wanni and Balasingham in London immediately following 
the June 9-10 conference were spurned as the group 
continued its hardline stance.)  On June 30, the 
Japanese ambassador traveled to the Wanni for a meeting 
with LTTE political leader S.P. Thamilchelvam. 
Afterwards, Japanese Embassy contacts described the 
meeting to poloff as "cordial and constructive."  They 
said Thamilchelvam seemed intent on waiting for the next 
GSL proposal before agreeing to talks, but that the LTTE 
was seeking to respond positively.  When contacted, a 
Tamil National Alliance (TNA) parliamentarian in the 
east, Joseph Pararajasingham, told us that he too felt 
hopeful about the current situation. 
 
¶3.  (C) Meanwhile, the June 27 LTTE-sponsored Pongu 
Tamil ("Rising Tamil") rally in Jaffna reportedly had 
fewer participants than originally forecast.  Embassy 
contacts described the event as "placid."  Speakers 
reportedly made no reference to the stalled peace talks. 
 
GSL DELIBERATE RE NEXT STEPS 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) In the wake of the prime minister's recent trip 
to London (June 22-30), the government is drafting a 
proposal for an interim administration.  While in 
London, the PM and his delegation reportedly consulted 
with senior British government officials on the legal 
challenges facing Sri Lanka's reconstruction efforts. 
Key government minister G.L. Peiris at a June 26 
briefing stated the GSL would be offering a new draft 
proposal by mid-July.  In a follow-up comment to poloff, 
Peiris stressed the proposal was merely the next step of 
an ongoing process, but one that would require careful 
deliberation.  The GSL's conduct suggests it is putting 
more work into this current proposal for an interim 
administration than in previous drafts.  (Note:  In the 
lead-up to the early June Tokyo donors conference, the 
GSL offered draft administration proposals almost daily 
to the Tigers, who rejected them almost as quickly.) 
TNA member Pararajasingham said he expected a favorable 
Tiger response to the GSL's draft proposal. 
 
NORWEGIANS REGROUP 
------------------ 
 
¶5.  (C) In a good sign from the peace process 
facilitators, Norwegian polchief Tomas Stangeland 
confirmed that former ambassador Jon Westborg has just 
returned to Sri Lanka as a special envoy to shepherd the 
peace process while the current ambassador, Hans 
Brattskar, is out of the country for several weeks. 
Norwegians and LTTE reports speculate that the 
Norwegians could schedule a GSL-Tiger meeting sometime 
in August or September, with Switzerland as a possible 
venue. 
 
LTTE-INVOLVED KILLINGS CONTINUE 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Meanwhile, tensions in the South and the Tamil 
community continued to mount over increased LTTE 
violence.  The Tigers are alleged to be responsible for 
the killing of a former member of an anti-LTTE political 
party on June 27, in addition to an unsuccessful attempt 
to storm a prison and release a fellow cadre detained on 
murder charges.  Both incidents took place in the east. 
(Note:  These incidents follow the previously reported 
killings of a highly-respected counterterrorism police 
officer in Colombo on June 23 and an anti-LTTE Tamil 
politician in Jaffna on June 14, both with the hallmarks 
of a Tiger hit.)  Opposition Leader Mahinda Rajapakse 
and key presidental confidant Lakshman Kadirgamar called 
attention to these killings during conversations with 
Charge on June 26 and 27.  Both men spoke of their 
growing distrust for the Tigers, even as they stressed 
that no one supported a return to violence. 
 
¶7. (C) The tension continued as increased security in 
Colombo was apparent over the June 28-29 weekend.  While 
press reports detailed the detention of "hundreds of 
Tamils," police contacts have told us that most have 
been released, with only a small number of individuals 
being held for interrogation.  Interior Minister John 
Amaratunga, during a June 30 meeting with Charge, 
characterized the Tiger activity as "isolated 
incidents," and said that increased security measures 
were temporary. 
 
MONITORING MISSION REPORTS ON SHIP SINKING 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (C) The Norwegian-led Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission 
(SLMM) on June 27 released its report on the June 14 
sinking of a suspected LTTE arms vessel off Mullativu. 
The SLMM said that neither party violated the ceasefire 
agreement and the GSL was within its rights in 
challenging the ship.  It said the LTTE ship was in 
violation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of 
the Sea by not flying "an appropriate flag, and 
official, visible identification."  The report urges 
both parties to contact the SLMM more promptly in the 
future, and lays the burden of reaching an agreement 
preventing future sea clashes "as soon as possible" on 
the GSL and LTTE.  Both sides have received the report 
without comment, with the entire SLMM report being 
posted on the pro-LTTE website, TamilNet. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9.  (C) The recent comments by both the GSL and the 
Tigers point to positive signs on the surface for a 
resumption of peace process talks.  Underneath, however, 
the Tigers' continued violence and the government's 
security measures indicate each are wary of being too 
optimistic.  Despite all the undercurrents, the prospect 
for restarting face-to-face negotiations is the most 
hopeful since the early June conference in Tokyo.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
CAMP