This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 002139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2013 
TAGS: PREL AM TU
SUBJECT: ANNUAL ARMENIA PROCLAMATION: GOT SENSITIVITIES 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch.  Reasons 1.5 (b) and 
(d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: MFA DG Tezcan expressed the GOT's opposition 
to use of the term "genocide" in referring to the events of 
1915 and asked the U.S. to refrain from using that term in 
connection with the April commemoration events.  DCM 
encouraged the GOT to renew efforts to reconcile views of 
history and to seek ways to improve relations with Armenia. 
End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) On March 28, at the MFA's request, DCM met with Ecvet 
Tezcan, DG for Intelligence and Research.  Tezcan, who was 
accompanied by DDG for the Americas Suna Ilicak, wanted to 
highlight Turkey's concern regarding the content of President 
Bush's upcoming April 24 Armenia proclamation.  The GOT had 
learned that 104 Congressmen had jointly sent a letter to the 
President asking that this year he use the word "genocide" in 
describing the events of 1915. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Tezcan underlined Turkish sensitivities about the use 
of genocide, reminding DCM that characterization of the 1915 
events as genocide would affect bilateral relations, as it 
had with France.  He described U.S.-Turkey relations as 
fundamentally close and durable, but he urged that we not add 
a further "test" by making an issue of what, from the Turkish 
perspective, ought to be a matter for historians. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Harkening back to the year 2000 debate regarding the 
commemoration, Tezcan called the annual commemoration a 
"sword of Damocles" for our bilateral relationship.  He 
expressed displeasure with the use in last year's 
proclamation of the word "massacre," but he did not push the 
point.  He thought that certain groups might view the current 
U.S.-Turkish "problems" over northern Iraq as an opportunity 
to profit at Turkey's expense, but he asked that the USG 
recognize the dangers of stirring centuries' old hatreds in 
the region at this time. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) The DCM replied that the USG recognizes Turkey's 
sensitivity on this topic.  He added that we had always found 
ways to address the issue, but we encourage Turkey to 
reinvigorate the attempts to reconcile differing views of 
history.  We also encourage Turkey to facilitate steps to put 
Armenian-Turkish bilateral relations on a "better footing," 
such as opening the border. 
 
 
PEARSON