This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 005737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, IIP/G/NEA-SA, 
INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPAUSDOC FOR 
4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKSUSDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION DECEMBER 12-16: CAPTURE OF 
SADDAM; ATTACKS ON US SOLDIERS IN KUWAIT; LETTER BOMBS TO 
NEWSPAPERS. 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  News of Saddam Hussein's capture was trumpeted 
in banner headlines on the front pages of all Arabic dailies 
as "The End of the Tyrant" and "The Mother of All Good 
News." Commentators call for a public trial and hope that 
Saddam's capture will contribute to a "change in the Arab 
mentality that glorifies criminal leaders like Saddam." 
Media reports that Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad 
stated that Kuwait would not seek the extradition of Saddam 
to Kuwait for trial, according to newspaper reports. 
 
All newspapers report on December 16 that a Kuwaiti man and 
three accomplices were arrested in connection with three 
separate shooting attacks on December 15 against US soldiers 
that slightly injured two soldiers, and a fourth against a 
bus carrying foreign workers that injured seven. Al-Seyassah 
reports on December 17 that the primary suspect stated, "I 
hate Americans and there is no justification for their 
presence in Kuwait after the arrest of Saddam."  On December 
17, all newspapers report that eleven more suspects were 
arrested in the case, including an Egyptian and a Moroccan. 
 
On December 12, all newspapers report that an employee at Al- 
Seyassah Arabic daily was injured by a letter bomb addressed 
to editor-in-chief Ahmed Al-Jarallah. A second letter bomb 
addressed to Al-Seyassah was intercepted, as were two others 
addressed to Al-Qabas Arabic daily and the Kuwait Writers 
Association, all mailed from the same place in Lebanon. 
Commentators denounce the letter bombs as "terrorist acts 
targeting Kuwait's freedom of speech and democracy." END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. News Stories: All newspapers published news of the 
capture of Saddam Hussein in banner headlines on their front 
pages over the image of Saddam in full beard during a 
medical examination after his capture. All Arabic dailies 
included special sections in today's editions dedicated to 
Saddam's capture. Headlines include: 
 
- "The End of the Tyrant" (Al-Qabas) 
- "Fall of the Devil" (Al-Watan) 
- "Captured, Humiliated" (Al-Anba) 
- "The Cowardly Criminal Found in a Rat Hole" (Al-Seyassah) 
- "The Mother of All Good News!" (Al-Rai Al-Aam) 
 
Foreign Minister Sheikh Dr. Mohammed Al-Sabah stated, "We 
look forward to effective involvement in the trial of 
Saddam," Al-Qabas reports. Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that "the 
trial of Saddam is the biggest obsession of the Kuwaiti 
people." All papers report that Foreign Minister Sheikh Dr. 
Mohammad Al-Sabah received a phone call from Secretary of 
State Powell during which Secretary Powell congratulated 
Kuwait and the Kuwaitis on Saddam's capture. 
 
On December 16, all newspapers report a statement by Prime 
Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad that Kuwait would not seek 
the extradition of Saddam to Kuwait for trial. 
 
On December 16, all newspapers report the arrest of a 
Kuwaiti man and three accomplices in connection with three 
separate shooting attacks against US soldiers on December 
15 that slightly injured two soldiers and a December 15 
attack on a bus carrying foreign workers that left seven 
injured. 
 
On December 12, all newspapers report that a letter bomb 
addressed to the editor-in-chief of Arabic daily Al-Seyassah 
and English daily the Arab Times, Ahmed Al-Jarallah, 
exploded as Al-Jarallah's assistant tried to open it, 
wounding the assistant slightly. Security officials 
intercepted three more booby-trapped parcels, all mailed 
from the same place in Lebanon as the Al-Seyassah package, 
and addressed to Al-Qabas Arabic daily, Al-Seyassah Arabic 
daily and to the president of the Writer's Association. 
 
Al-Anba reports on its December 16 front page, "Handcuffed 
Saddam in Kuwait for Three Hours." The paper reports that 
"an informed diplomatic source" told the paper that Saddam 
was flown to an airbase in northern Kuwait after his 
capture, and then to an American military facility in Qatar 
for questioning. 
 
All newspapers report on December 13 that security at 
Kuwait's airport, borders and postal facilities has been 
stepped up and leave for police and security officers has 
been cancelled in advance of the December 21-22 GCC Summit 
to be held in Kuwait. 
 
Al-Watan reports that Jordanians and Palestinians in Jordan 
are saddened by news of Saddam's capture, and that Kuwaiti 
students studying in Jordan are concerned and fear a 
backlash. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "The Nest of Illusions" 
Editor-in-chief of independent Al-Watan, Mohammad Al-Jassim 
opined (12/15):  "The US must exploit this moment to further 
its goal of changing the current Arab mentality.  Arabs feel 
humiliated at the capture of Saddam, but this should be a 
turning point in changing Arab psychology, which glorifies 
criminal leaders like Saddam. The United States must bring 
Saddam to trial soon in order to deliver a direct message to 
the Arabs, saying: `Saddam suppressed you just like other 
leaders do by depriving you of your freedom and humanity and 
sacrificing your blood for their power." 
 
¶4.  "God Gives Time, But Never Neglects" 
Dr. Sami Khalifa wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (12/15): 
"This is the end of the tyrant, which was dictated by God. 
We hope the world will witness an Iraqi public trail for all 
the crimes Saddam committed, and that he will not to be 
hidden away by the American administration as was done with 
other Baathist leaders." 
 
¶5.  "I Hope Bin Laden is Next" 
Liberal Abdelatif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(12/15):  "The capture of Saddam alive is a striking 
achievement for the coalition forces and a knock-out blow 
for terrorism. However, many Arabs may refuse to believe 
news of [Saddam's capture], just as they refused to believe 
the death of Saddam's sons. His capture will put an end to 
Arab and Muslim pipedreams of resisting the coalition 
forces. Saddam's capture is also a blow to the Arab 
mentality that opposed the liberation of Iraq. We 
congratulate the Iraqi people, and we hope the capture of 
Bin Laden alive soon." 
 
¶6.  "The Fall of Saddam is the End of an Era" 
Liberal Dr. Ahmad Al-Rubei wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(12/15):  "The fall of Saddam is a strike against the Baath 
party and their supporters who carry on terrorist actions 
and international terrorism. [Saddam's capture] will 
contribute to the stability of Iraq. His capture is a lesson 
for all tyrants that injustice cannot continue." 
 
¶7.  "The Letter Bomb" 
Mohammad Al-Saleh wrote in independent Al-Qabas (12/12): 
"The person accused of sending the letter bomb has not only 
attacked the [Al-Seyassah] newspaper, but also the stability 
and security of Kuwait. We hope that such acts will not 
contribute in justifying restrictions of freedom of opinion 
and in so doing help those who sent the letter bomb to 
achieve their objectives." 
 
¶8.  "In Confronting Terrorism" 
Liberal Secretary General of Kuwait Journalist Association 
Faisal Al-Qanai wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (12/14): 
"It is normal for Kuwait to be the target for acts of 
terrorism due to its freedom of expression and democracy. 
However, terrorism will not stop the progress of freedom and 
our belief in democracy." 
 
 
MORAN