This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 002224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/01/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER EAC
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - SEPTEMBER 1, 2003 
 
REF: STATE 250479 
 
Classified By: CHARGE ALAN G. MISENHEIMER, for reasons 
1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened an EAC 
meeting on September 1 to consider a Department Threat 
Advisory (reftel).  Also discussed was the lack of credible 
and specific recent threat reporting on American targets in 
Yemen, the impending al-Moayad extradition, the official 
designation of Shaykh Zindani as a supporter of terrorism, 
and the need to convene a warden meeting.  Key offices and 
personnel represented at the meeting included:  POL/ECON, 
CONS, MO, FPD, ORCA, DAO, OMC, and SOC YEMEN.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  DCM briefed the cable describing the continuing 
threat from Al-Qaeda to targets in the Persian Gulf region, 
East Asia, Africa and CONUS.  Attendees concurred with the 
cable's observation that the enemy remains active, and that 
host government support to counter the threat must be 
sustained and enhanced.  ORCA and OMC briefed recent intel 
relating to potential security threats in Yemen.  EAC members 
agreed that there was no credible information indicating a 
current heightened threat in Yemen.  Nevertheless, attendees 
agreed on the need to continue good personal security 
practices, including continuing to vary routes and times. 
 
¶3.  (C)  DCM updated events surrounding the continued 
incarceration of Hafez al-Moayad in Germany.  The case has 
been remanded to the Frankfurt regional court, where it is 
likely to remain for several weeks.  The case will then 
return to the Supreme Court level where it might be delayed 
again for several weeks before final adjudication.  Available 
information indicates that al-Moayad's extradition to the 
United States is likely to be affirmed.  The DCM commented 
that the post is following events closely and will 
re-evaluate the security situation and any potential threats 
against American targets at the time of the final extradition. 
 
¶4.  (C)  DCM updated events surrounding the USG designation 
of Shaykh Zindani as a supporter of terrorism.  The DCM noted 
that the Zindani case differs from al-Moayad in that Zindani 
is an ideologue and minor Islah party official who enjoys 
less-widespread support than al-Moayad.  DCM reiterated that 
the ROYG has been informed of the pending designation, but 
that the official U.S. declaration has been put on hold. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Finally, the EAC agreed on the need to schedule an 
early warden meeting to reiterate caution against "soft 
targets".  Consul had recently returned from meeting wardens 
in the south and noted that given the likely 
end-of-summer/post-war return of Amcits to Yemen a warden 
meeting would be beneficial.  The EAC decided to schedule a 
warden meeting in the near term. 
MISENHEIMER