This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ISTANBUL 000776 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV TU
SUBJECT: TURKISH ARMED FORCES DEPUTY AFFIRMS COMMITMENT TO 
EU, BUT TAKES SWIPES AT U.S., EU, AND DOMESTIC "OPPONENTS" 
 
 
Classified By: Consul General David Arnett for Reasons 1.5 (b & d) 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Declaring at a globalization conference that 
the Turkish military is not against Turkey's pursuit of EU 
membership, deputy chief of the TGS Buyukanit further 
qualified the military's stance with a series of reservations 
and an indirect but clear set of jabs at the U.S.  End 
summary. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Opening a Turkish Armed Forces-sponsored symposium 
on globalization at the Military Academy in Istanbul on May 
29, Turkish General Staff (TGS) deputy Yasar Buyukanit 
declared that the Turkish Armed Forces cannot be against the 
EU because the EU is the "ultimate condition" for realizing 
Ataturk's modernization targets.  He went on to denounce 
claims that the Turkish military opposed European Union 
membership as an "unfair attack."  He called for the EU to 
treat Turkey's "40-year old" membership application "without 
any prejudice."  At the same time, Buyukanit denounced past 
foreign support for domestic terrorism (i.e., Kurdish 
separatism) by countries using the guise of "trying to teach 
us human rights."  Buyukanit also warned those with "archaic 
and separatist goals" that EU membership could not be used as 
a means to advance their objectives. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) In thinly-veiled criticism of the U.S. and Western 
Europe, Buyukanit criticized "developed" and "hegemonic" 
states for not being sensitive to local concerns in pursuing 
policies that "exploit ethnic diversities" and "damage social 
stability" in developing countries.  While condemning 
terrorism, Buyukanit said that "powerful countries" must also 
pursue strategies that are in compliance with international 
law.  Finally, in light of vast income disparities, developed 
countries should be less "stingy" in their approach to 
developing countries. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Amidst continuing speculation following remarks by NSC 
Secretary-General Kilinc and subsequent remarks by TGS Chief 
 
SIPDIS 
Ozkok, conference attendees (including many of Turkey's most 
prominent columnists, academics, and retired diplomats and 
generals) expected Buyukanit to deliver a message confirming 
the military's commitment to Turkey's EU membership. 
Although most appeared encouraged by his remarks, some of the 
attendess were unconvinced.  Ilnur Cevik, editor and 
columnist for the English-language Turkish Daily News, 
pointed out to poloff that Buyukanit had given no specifics 
on the necessary steps that the military itself would have to 
take for Turkey to fulfill the Copenhagen criteria.  One 
foreign analyst and long-time Turkey resident was 
particularly struck by the jabs at the U.S.  In remarks to 
Pol Counselor in Ankara, leading commentator Cengiz Candar 
agreed with this latter assessment.  Candar saw Buyukanit as 
using the EU-candidacy-related portion of his remarks (with 
support for EU candidacy couched in negative terms, i.e. the 
Armed Forces "cannot be against") as a mere lead-in to a 
criticism of the U.S. and a warning to domestic groups the 
military judges to be against Ataturkist principles. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Other columnists also picked up on the negative 
message: Sedat Ergin in centrist mass-circulation "Hurriyet" 
focused on Buyukanit's criticism of the U.S. and 
globalization; Himet Bila in Kemalist "Cumhuriyet" 
interpreted the remarks as a warning to the West and a 
defiant statement against those who want to see the Turkish 
military's influence wane. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Comment: lack of specifics and swipes at the U.S. and 
EU in Buyukanit's remarks have left many questions 
unanswered.  Some of our Istanbul contacts worry that at a 
time when the TGS is making critical decisions about 
senior-level appointments, TGS Chief Ozkok appears to be more 
and more isolated.  Hurriyet columnist Cuneyt Ulsever told 
poloff before the speech that he is worried about divisions 
within the top brass and thinks some anti-EU hard-liners may 
be looking for an "emergency" to justify extending in their 
positions for another year. 
ARNETT