This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KATHMANDU 000643 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR SA/INS 
LONDON FOR POL/CGURNEY 
NSC FOR MILLARD 
PLEASE PASS TO USAID/ANE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINS PTER NP GON
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  KING ADDRESSES FAR-WEST 
 
REF: KATHMANDU 18 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  On April 4, King Gyanendra addressed 
thousands at a civic reception in Nepal's far-west.  The 
King's brief remarks highlighted the importance of the 
monarchy as an institution, the need for good governance to 
achieve development, and his commitment to representative 
multiparty democracy.  The King asked for the political 
parties to support the peace talks and the interim cabinet. 
The King's themes undercut Maoist arguments for radical 
constitutional change.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) On April 4, King Gyanendra addressed thousands at a 
civic reception in Dhangadhi in Nepal's far-west.  This is 
the second public event since the King's coronation; the 
first was reported reftel.  The King's brief remarks 
highlighted the importance of the monarchy as an institution, 
the need for good governance to achieve development, and his 
commitment to representative multiparty democracy.  In a 
pointed statement to political parties and the Maoists, he 
called on them to "contribute in earnest to make the peace 
process a success" and not to stand against the popular will 
of the Nepali people for peace.  In statements directed at 
the international community, the King requested the political 
parties to support the interim cabinet, arguing that "the 
international community has begun to place their faith in 
Nepal and its governance due to the improvement in the 
country's general condition."  Unlike the monarch's first 
address, where political parties criticized the expense and 
tried to paint the civic program as an attempt to sideline 
them, there was little positive or negative publicity 
surrounding the latest speech. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Comment:  The King's speech, the second in a series 
of carefully staged "public outreach" events, was crafted to 
resonate with domestic audiences weary of the long insurgency 
and grateful for the respite provided by the cease-fire.  By 
calling on the Maoists and the political parties together to 
"contribute to peace," the King signaled that he considers 
each equally important--and potentially obstructive--to 
progress towards peace.  The speech also co-opted many of the 
Maoist themes for a "new Nepal" and "true democracy," placing 
them in a framework that does not require radical change of 
the constitution, as envisaged by the Maoists. 
MALINOWSKI