This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT, INL, G/TIP, CA/VO/F/P 
 
E.O. 12958:   N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREF PHUM PTER CVIS KFRD CE PK
SUBJECT:  GSL interdicts human smuggling attempts, 
highlighting new trend involving third country nationals 
 
Refs:  (A) FBIS Reston Va DTG 010033X Aug 03 
-      (B) Milan 476 (Notal) 
-      (C) Colombo 1267, and previous 
 
(U) This message is Sensitive but Unclassified -- Please 
handle accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  In recent weeks, the GSL has 
interdicted several large-scale human smuggling 
attempts.  Those netted in the raids (over 800 people) 
have overwhemingly been third country nationals, mostly 
from India and Pakistan.  This is a departure from an 
earlier trend involving mainly locals.  The GSL is 
committed to combatting the problem, which seems to have 
been sparked by liberalized visa rules.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) INTERDICTIONS:  In recent weeks, Sri Lankan 
authorities have interdicted several large-scale human 
smuggling attempts.  The interdictions, most of which 
occurred in areas along Sri Lanka's southwest coast near 
Colombo, have included: 
 
-- On June 23, Sri Lankan police arrested 166 people. 
Those arrested were mostly Pakistani, but included some 
Bangladeshis. 
 
-- On June 30, police arrested 260 people, the vast 
majority of whom were Pakistani. 
 
-- On July 17, police arrested 115 people.  Most of 
those arrested were Indian, along with some Pakistanis. 
 
-- On July 20, police arrested 114 people, most of whom 
were Indian. 
 
-- On July 24, police arrested 174 people, most of whom 
were Indian and Pakistani nationals. 
 
-- On July 31, police arrested 21 people from both India 
and Pakistan. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) While there have been some releases, most of 
the over 800 people arrested are still being detained 
for further investigation.  Superintendent Samaratunga 
of the Criminal Investigative Division (CID) told us 
that only 33 individuals have been released thus far, 
leaving over 700 still in jail.  (Note:  See Para Seven 
regarding recent arrests of several alleged "kingpins," 
who were said to be orchestrating the operations.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) THE LATEST TREND:  Based on what we have 
picked up from the GSL, this latest trend in human 
smuggling seems to center on the use of the existing 
network of modified fishing trawlers that have been used 
in years past to try to smuggle Sri Lankans out of the 
country.  (Note:  Smuggling operations involving Sri 
Lankan nationals are said to still exist, but the 
authorities believe this sort of trafficking has sharply 
decreased in the past year as traffickers focus more on 
third country nationals -- see Reftels.)  Using these 
modified vessels, the human smugglers make a roughly 
three-week trip across the Indian Ocean to the Red Sea, 
where the illegal immigrants are transferred onto larger 
vessels.  According to reports, if successful, many of 
the illegal immigrants wind up in Europe, especially 
Italy and Greece. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) THE ROLE OF VISA RULE CHANGES:  According to 
the government, the demographic change in those smuggled 
out of Sri Lanka from locals to third country nationals 
is most likely due to two key developments.  First and 
most importantly, Sri Lanka, in staggered phases, has 
allowed visitors from South Asian Association for 
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries to get visas on 
entry.  In the past, citizen from SAARC countries had to 
get visas at the appropriate Sri Lankan embassy or 
consulate before traveling to Sri Lanka.  The old rule 
allowed the GSL to do at least a modicum of screening of 
those intending to travel to Sri Lanka, which is not 
possible under the new rule.  Second, direct air service 
to Sri Lanka from Pakistan recently reopened after a 
long hiatus, providing a convenient method for Pakistani 
nationals to enter the country.  (Note:  Pakistan 
International Airlines recently restarted a thrice- 
weekly round-trip flight between Karachi and Colombo.) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) COMMENT:  The Sri Lankan government seems 
fully committed to combatting the human smuggling 
problem.  The Interior Ministry is focused on the issue, 
holding regular meetings with representatives of 
concerned local embassies.  (Note:  The Interior 
Ministry, for example, is also aware of the 
counterterrorism concerns involved when examining human 
smuggling operations.  From what we understand, no CT 
nexus has been found involving the current crop of 
cases.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The police are also seized with the matter 
and, in recent days, they have arrested several alleged 
Sri Lankan "human smuggling kingpins."  That said, the 
most logical move to counter the current human smuggling 
epidemic appears to involve the GSL's adjustment of 
visa rules for SAARC nationals back to the status quo 
ante (i.e., no visa on arrival).  This is difficult to 
do, as the new rules have brought in a huge number of 
legitimate tourists, especially from India, which has 
helped buck up the island's fragile tourism industry. 
END COMMENT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
ENTWISTLE