This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/06/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER BM
SUBJECT: EAP DAS DALEY MEETS WITH SPDC SECRETARY ONE 
GENERAL KHIN NYUNT - DISCUSSIONS ON COUNTER-TERRORISM, 
POLITICAL DIALOGUE, AND PRISONER RELEASES SHOW SOME RESULT 
 
REF: A. STATE 102828 (NOTAL) 
     ¶B. RANGOON 00539 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN M. MARTINEZ FOR REASONS 1.5 (B AND D). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  EAP DAS Matt Daley, COM, and DCM (note 
taker) met with Secretary 1, General Khin Nyunt April 27 in 
Rangoon.  General Khin Nyunt emphasized counter-terrorism 
cooperation and the added security the GOB has provided to 
the U.S. Embassy.  Daley urged the GOB to accelerate dialogue 
with the NLD, to increase press freedoms, and to release more 
political prisoners.  Since the meeting, twenty-one political 
prisoners have been released, including Dr. Salai Tun Than 
(Ref B). According to the Burmese embassy in Washington, Dr. 
Salai Tun Than's release was ordered in direct response to 
DAS Daley's request.  He also called on Senior General Than 
Shwe to meet with UN Special Envoy Razali soon.  S-1 said 
Razali would be invited for a visit in June.  The General 
said Aung San Suu Kyi was "conceited" and although allowed to 
travel around the country, had criticized the government in a 
"very condescending manner."  DAS Daley suggested he "set 
aside the protocol book, invite her to lunch, and sit down 
and talk with her with no set agenda."  Results of the 
demarche requested Ref A were reported separately.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) COUNTER-TERRORISM: Secretary 1, General Khin Nyunt 
(the head of Military Intelligence and the third-ranking 
officer in the ruling State Peace and Development Committee) 
was accompanied by the Foreign Minister, the Deputy Foreign 
Minister, and three other officials during the call by Daley, 
COM, and DCM. 
 
-- After reftel demarche was delivered and discussed (see 
septel reply to Ref A), Khin Nyunt spoke of the close 
counter-terrorism cooperation extended by the GOB to the USG, 
highlighting the added security provided the embassy during 
the war in Iraq.  Daley thanked S-1 for the added security 
and noted that terrorism in Southeast Asia was a bigger 
concern than many people had previously realized. 
 
-- Khin Nyunt recounted the March 27 bomb attacks in Rangoon, 
reporting one fatality (vice two, as we had previously 
thought).  Daley noted that when we learned of these 
bombings, we called them acts of terrorism and condemned 
them.  S-1 also termed the recent sabotage of a natural gas 
pipeline, reportedly by KNU insurgents, a terrorist attack. 
(NOTE: the GOB has frequently attempted to blur the 
distinction between terrorism per se and other forms of 
violence related to ongoing ethnic insurgencies.) 
 
-- The general added, "We are trying our best to prevent 
terrorism--we are taking steps to assure that our country 
will not be used as a stepping stone to export terrorism to 
other countries." 
 
¶3. (C) DIALOGUE WITH THE NLD: Daley stated that there is a 
sense of disappointment in the U.S. and in the broader 
international community that the process of dialogue appears 
to be losing momentum.  We would hope this process could be 
accelerated, DAS Daley emphasized.  General Khin Nyunt 
responded pointedly, saying: 
 
"We are not trying to avoid dialogue with the NLD, but she 
(ASSK) is very conceited.  Anyway, she has not yet proposed 
any dialogue.  We let her travel in the country and what does 
she do?  She criticizes the government in a very 
condescending manner and stirs up the people against the 
government." 
 
Daley commented that while Aung San Suu Kyi was undoubtedly 
strong-willed both in personality and principles, the 
government is powerful, and need not fear destabilization if 
it moves forward on the democracy and human rights agenda. 
Further, he had never known her to make a disrespectful 
comment about the military as an institution even as she 
called for a transformed polity.  DAS Daley urged Khin Nyunt 
to set aside the protocol book, invite Aung San Suu Kyi to 
lunch, and open a discussion with no set agenda. 
 
¶4. (C) POLITICAL PRISONERS: Daley made a strong pitch to Khin 
Nyunt to make a mass release of political prisoners as soon 
as next month, adding that freeing all the political 
prisoners would not threaten regime stability.  This would be 
seen as an act of confidence and good faith by other nations, 
international organizations, and potential business partners. 
 The more serious threat to the regime is economic, DAS Daley 
continued, and an act of confidence and good faith could help 
on that front.  COM proposed that, pending the release of all 
political prisoners, the GOB release a group of approximately 
190 prisoners who are suffering from severe physical and 
mental illnesses.  COM and DAS also requested that an Embassy 
consular officer be allowed to visit Dr. Salai Tun Than, as 
his case has generated substantial congressional and public 
interest and concern in the United States.  Regarding all 
three proposals, General Khin Nyunt nodded and said, "I will 
look into it." (Note: Per Ref B, three political prisoners 
were released just a few days after this meeting.  Dr. Salai 
Tun Than and 17 other political prisoners were released on 
May 4th.  According to the Burmese embassy in Washington, the 
release of Dr. Salai Tun Than was ordered in direct response 
to DAS Daley's request.  End Note). 
 
¶5.  (C) THE MEDIA: At Aung San Suu Kyi's request, DAS Daley 
commented that the GOB-controlled media does not acknowledge 
or even mention the NLD, in contrast to the regime's press 
releases to foreign governments and media outlets, which 
frequently mention prospects for possible cooperation or 
talks with the NLD.  Could there be a bit more openness in 
the local media?  S-1 did not respond. 
 
¶6. (SBU) RAZALI: When DAS Daley pressed Khin Nyunt to invite 
UN Special Envoy Razali back to Burma quickly and to assure 
that he meets with Senior General Than Shwe, Khin Nyunt 
replied that unfortunately the schedule for May was full.  He 
was happy to announce, however, that Razali had just been 
invited to come back in June. 
 
¶7. (C) COMMENT: As always, Khin Nyunt conducted himself in 
the polished, professional manner that has become something 
of his trademark.  Within a regime of distinctly unpolished 
generals, one of his key roles is to be the presentable face 
of the SPDC to foreigners.  He was cordial and seemingly 
agreeable even on the issue of a mass political prisoner 
release.  However, he lost his suavity momentarily when 
describing Aung San Suu Kyi.  There is clearly no love lost 
between them.  Interestingly, as Daley made the point on 
moving the political dialogue forward, the MFA attendees and 
even Major Myo Aung could be seen to nod their heads in 
agreement.  End Comment. 
 
¶8. (U) DAS Daley has cleared on this message. 
Martinez