This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 001900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN AND CA/OCS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/23/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM CASC ASEC KDEM PINR PINS GT
SUBJECT: FRG ORGANIZES VIOLENT PROTESTS 
 
REF: GUATEMALA 1888 
 
Classified By: Ambassador J.R. Hamilton for reason 1.5 (b). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In response to a major legal reversal in Rios 
Montt's bid for the Presidency (reftel), thousands of 
well-organized Rios Montt supporters took to the streets of 
the capital on July 24, closing off strategic intersections 
with burning tires.  Mobs have targeted opposition newspapers 
as well as surrounding the Constitutional and Supreme Court 
buildings.  One journalist is confirmed dead from a heart 
attack as he was covering events.  Another was beaten and 
doused with gasoline before being pulled to safety.  The GOG 
has been slow to mobilize police resources and the Ambassador 
has called President Portillo, Minister of Interior Calderon 
and Foreign Minister Gutierrez, to urge restoration of order. 
 Portillo announced at 3:00 PM that he has ordered combined 
police/military elements to restore order.  A warden message 
has been transmitted, visa applicants were sent home, 
services for Amcits continue, but we will be on an "essential 
staff" basis July 25.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On the morning of July 24, pro-Rios Montt protesters 
launched coordinated actions across the city.  The mobs, 
which include thugs in ski masks armed with guns, molotov 
cocktails, and sticks initially targeted the opposition news 
media and the offices of opposition financier Dionisio 
Gutierrez.  Buses are reported to be bringing more protesters 
in from the countryside.  Mobs are reported to be forming 
outside the Constitutional Court building, vowing not to 
leave until Rios Montt is registered as a candidate.  Another 
group has taken positions outside a single-gated residential 
community where numerous politicians and diplomats, including 
U.S. Mission personnel, live.  The protesters vow to block 
the entrance for at least three days and have set up tents 
and are passing out food.  Human Rights Ombudsman, Sergio 
Morales has been threatened and has abandoned his office. 
The Ministry of Education has recommended all classes be 
canceled tomorrow.  The Bi-National Center has also closed. 
 
¶4. (C) In response to reports that police were withdrawing 
from areas where protesters were gathering, the Ambassador 
twice informed Minister of Interior Calderon that the Embassy 
would be harshly critical if the police allowed the mobs to 
become violent or if the situation descended into general 
disorder.  During the second conversation, Calderon told the 
Ambassador he was sending reinforcements to the offices of 
newspapers Siglo 21 and El Periodico as well as to the 
business center that seem to be most threatened.  Shortly 
thereafter, Foreign Minister Gutierrez told the Ambassador he 
would seek to promote a gentleman's agreement for keeping a 
lid on the situation once the immediate situation is 
contained.  Gutierrez said President Portillo supports the 
idea.  At 3:00 PM, state television broadcast a Portillo 
announcement pledging to restore public order through a 
combined police/military response.  In a telephone 
conversation with the Ambassador, Portillo offered to focus 
police attention on disturbances in residential areas and 
said he would appeal to the FRG leadership to turn the 
disturbances off. 
 
¶5. (C) Earlier, on the evening of July 23, the Ambassador 
spoke with FRG Congressman Aristides Crespo to urge the FRG 
to resist the temptation to engage in public disorder in 
response to the court decision.  A testy Crespo denied that 
any mobilization was centrally planned, and pointedly refused 
to commit to the need for protests to remain peaceful. 
During the morning commute of July 24, Embassy officers noted 
a large number of portable toilets had appeared overnight in 
a park over a major intersection.  Other officers heard 
reports of trucks laden with food and water circulating in 
areas where demonstrations later "spontaneously occurred." 
 
¶6. (C) The Embassy has not been targeted in any of the 
disturbances.  Employees have restricted their movements, 
security forces have been pulled inside the fence line to 
prevent accidental encounters with protesters.  Approximately 
150 visa applicants were given new appointments and sent 
home.  A warden message advising Amcits of the situation has 
been cleared with CA and transmitted.  Amcits still have 
access to the Embassy building.  The EAC convened at 2:30 PM 
local time and developed staffing plans, alternate lodging 
for those living in affected areas, and considered ways to 
reunite separated families.  We will operate with only 
essential staff on July 25. 
HAMILTON