This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 001603 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, S/CT 
NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  09-15-13 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PINS PHUM CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  Introductory meeting with Japanese envoy ahead 
of Tokyo follow-up meeting 
 
Refs:  Colombo 1565, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead. 
Reasons 1.5 (b, d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  Ambassador Lunstead had an 
introductory meeting with Japanese special envoy 
Yashushi Akashi on September 11.  Akashi shared his 
views on the current situation, and touched on issues to 
be raised during the September 12 Tokyo follow-up 
meeting.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador Lunstead had an introductory meeting 
with Japanese special envoy Yasushi Akashi on September 
¶11.  Akashi made the following points re the current 
situation: 
 
--  Akashi reiterated Japanese support for the peace 
process, with the Government of Japan playing a special 
role due to the longstanding relationship between the 
two countries; and also because Japan is the largest 
donor to Sri Lanka. 
 
-- Akashi stated that the GoJ was "anxious" to do 
immediate reconstruction work in the north/east, and 
noted that the Japanese and Norwegians should have 
"complementary" and not competing roles; i.e., the 
Japanese as donors and facilitators of 
reconstruction/rehabilitation, and the Norwegians as 
political facilitators. 
 
-- Akashi said Japan was embarking on a new route in Sri 
Lanka.  In other situations, it had increased its aid 
after peace was established.  Here Japan was attempting 
to use its aid as leverage to bring peace about. 
 
-- Regarding the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam 
(LTTE), Akashi expressed considerable frustration with 
their continued suspension of negotiations, and noted 
with concern the recent spate of killings of anti-LTTE 
Tamil politicians.  Further, Akashi noted that during 
his last meeting with Tiger supremo V. Prabakharan, 
Prabakharan seemed to listen attentively to Akashi with 
a "narrow focus," but not a closed mind.  Akashi also 
seemed to think that Tiger political leader S.P. 
Thamilchelvam's recently increased role might not 
necessarily be a bad thing, citing Prabhakaran's deep 
trust of Thamilchelvam, but he noted that Tiger chief 
negotiator Anton Balasingham's absence of late was not 
good. 
 
-- On the domestic politics front, Akashi agreed on the 
need to include President Kumaratunga in peace process 
developments, citing the problems caused by differences 
between Kumaratunga and Prime Minister Ranil 
Wickremesinghe.  He said Kumaratunga seemed willing to 
accept an invitation for an official visit to Tokyo next 
spring -- part of Tokyo's efforts to woo her. 
 
¶3.  (C) In response to Akashi's points, Ambassador 
Lunstead noted the need to consolidate efforts to get 
the LTTE to return to talks, and emphasized that the 
Japanese and Norwegians need to balance complementary 
roles.  Regarding the forthcoming LTTE proposals for 
interim administration of the north/east, the Ambassador 
noted that it would be important to examine the 
proposals both for substance, and for the proposed 
process of restarting negotiations.  The proposals would 
no doubt be maximalist, but what was important was if 
the Tigers were willing to use them as a starting point 
for negotiations.  Following on this, Akashi said that 
Prime Minister Wickremesinghe had told him that the LTTE 
counterproposals would likely contain different elements 
than those of the GSL's, and that the LTTE would likely 
ask for an increase of powers.  Akashi and Ambassador 
agreed on the necessity of a return to face-to-face 
negotiations between the GSL and LTTE. 
 
¶4.  (C) COMMENT:  Akashi is clearly frustrated with the 
Tigers, but appeared hopeful ahead of the September 12 
donors meeting (reported Septel), and his following 
meetings with the LTTE and other players.  The readout 
from his meeting with the Tigers in the north on 
September 14 will be key in gauging the Tigers' current 
state of mind.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶5.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD