This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 002062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, MAY 14: TERRORISM IN SAUDI 
ARABIA; NEW IRAQI GOVERNMENT; DEMOCRACY IN MIDDLE EAST; 
PRESIDENT BUSH'S MAY 9 SPEECH 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: The May 13 terrorist bombings in Riyadh are 
interpreted as attacks against the Saudi government, rather 
than American interests. Commentary on the future of the 
Middle East generated earlier in the week by President 
Bush's May 9 address at South Carolina University continues. 
One writer suggests a GCC-Iraq-Iran economic bloc for 
greater negotiating leverage before the establishment of the 
free-trade zone proposed by the President. 
 
Two prominent commentators taking opposing views on whether 
Baathists should be allowed to participate in a future Iraqi 
government. Another believes that without the capture of 
Saddam, the liberation of Iraq will not be complete. A 
conservative writer targets the America Israel Public 
Affairs Committee in an article titled "AIPAC Governs 
America." 
 
In the news, the Council of Ministers approved a law to 
allow women to stand for Kuwait City Municipal Council 
seats, pending National Assembly approval. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: The lead story this week has been the 
approval by the Council of Ministers of a new law granting 
women the right to run for and be elected to seats on the 
Kuwait City Municipal Council, as Al-Qabas reports on May 
¶12. On May 13, all newspapers report that Acting Prime 
Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad said the new law is not 
expected to be ratified by the National Assembly in the 
current session. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports on May 11 that Kuwaiti security 
arrested one of a group of Kuwaiti man who allegedly 
attempted to enter Iraq before the war in order to fight 
alongside Ansar al-Islam. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on May 11 that conservative Islamist Salafi 
and Kuwait University Shari'a and Islamic Affairs Professor 
Dr. Abdul Razzak Al-Shayji branded as "agents for the United 
States" a group of Kuwaiti women who traveled to the US for 
a USG-funded women's program. 
 
The campaign budgets of candidates running for National 
Assembly seats in the scheduled July elections ranges from 
KD 20,000-KD 3 million (approximately USD 60,000-9 million), 
according to Al-Qabas. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "The Use Of `Baathies'" 
Shiite MP Abdel-Mohsen Yousef Jamal wrote in independent Al- 
Qabas (5/12): "[The American civil administration in Iraq] 
has appointed a member of the Baath party as an 
Undersecretary for the Ministry of Health despite the 
rejection by Iraqi doctors of this appointment. [This 
appointment] will lead Iraqis to not obey the orders of such 
`Baathies' because they will feel that the Americans are not 
serious in achieving a real change in Iraq." 
 
¶4.  "Saddam Hussein Is Not The Baath Party" 
Liberal Abdellatif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(5/14): "[T]he Baath party is not responsible for what 
happened in Iraq, but rather Saddam himself. The Baath party 
was not a Nazi party, and never meant to be a terrorist 
party. The party played a major role in the liberation of 
Arabs in the region. Leaders of the Baath party must be 
given the chance to contribute to Iraq's future because of 
the continuation of this party is essential in Iraq's 
democracy. Therefore, the American administration should 
give some responsibilities to party members." 
 
¶4.  "Democracy Is Our Problem" 
Liberal Kuwait University Political Science Professor, Dr. 
Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah  (5/12): 
"Allied countries and the US are attempting to create a new 
democratic model in Iraq for other Arab countries to adopt. 
but what about democracy in the Gulf countries? Each Gulf 
country believes in democracy in its own way. Kuwait, for 
example, has not granted women their political rights [and] 
discriminates against some citizens. We expect that the 
democratic changes in Iraq will influence the Gulf States 
and the Arab world to achieve a real democracy in the 
future." 
 
¶5.  "Where Is Saddam Hussein?" 
Liberal Secretary General of the Kuwait Journalist's 
Association, Faisal Al-Qanai wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (5/13): "Unless Saddam and his regime are 
apprehended, the situation will remain unstable in Iraq. 
Thousands of Iraqis still fear the possibility of Saddam's 
reappearance in the future. The liberation of Iraq will not 
end until Saddam is found and dragged through the streets of 
Baghdad." 
 
¶6.  "The Future Of The Gulf" 
Dr. Naief Al-Hajraf wrote in independent Al-Anba (5/14): 
"President Bush's suggestion to establish a free trade zone 
in the Middle East in his recent speech at the University of 
South Carolina must be welcomed cautiously despite the 
importance of this idea. The GCC, Iran and Iraq must work 
closely to create a stronger position to negotiate with the 
US when it reveals more about its idea. It is time now for 
the cannons to stop, and to get the factories running." 
 
¶7.  "Who Is The Target Of The Explosions In Riyadh?" 
Dr. Ayed Al-Manna wrote in independent Al-Watan (5/14):  "If 
the terrorists of Saudi Arabia believe that raising slogans 
against the Americans will gain them sympathy, then they are 
hallucinating. [T]he goals of terrorism in Saudi Arabia are 
to impose an extremist ideology instead of adopting the 
sensible Islamic teachings, and to force the Saudi 
leadership to abandon its reform policies." 
 
¶8.  "Flame on the Hem of the Saudi Robe" 
Editor-in-Chief of independent Al-Seyassah, Ahmad Al- 
Jarallah wrote (5/14): "Are these [terrorist attacks] meant 
to expel Americans from the Arabian Peninsula? We do not 
believe so, because Americans have already left [Saudi 
Arabia]. Indeed, such acts of terror are meant to topple the 
ruling power and nothing else." 
 
¶9.  "AIPAC Governs America" 
Conservative Dr. Sami Khalifa wrote in independent Al-Rai Al- 
Aam (5/14): "[The American Israeli Public Affairs Committee 
(AIPAC)] is behind the unusual relationship between 
President Bush and Sharon, and is the main planner behind 
the Road Map and the appointment of Abu Mazen as the 
Palestinian Prime Minister. AIPAC is also behind the 
escalation against Syria and Iran in order to contain the 
power of the Palestinians and the Lebanese." 
 
 
URBANCIC