This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000524 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV AND DRL/PHD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID KDEM PGOV PHUM BM
SUBJECT: BURMA HRDF GRANT PROPOSALS 
 
REF: STATE 79965 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
¶1. (U)  Embassy Rangoon submits the four proposals described 
below in response to reftel request for projects promoting 
democracy and human rights.  The projects were chosen because 
they directly support U.S. goals in Burma in regard to 
strengthening civil society and democratic principles.  They 
are small projects which bolster the efforts of local 
organizations to instill and nurture critical thinking, 
freedom of expression, and, ultimately, self-determination in 
a society where these practices have been almost eliminated 
by 40 years of harsh military rule.  Three projects focus on 
ethnic minority groups while one would work with youth 
located in Rangoon.  All are grassroots projects with 
potential for long-term benefits beyond HRDF resources. 
 
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES/REQUIREMENTS 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Because the military government attempts to closely 
control the activities of all organizations in the country 
and is suspicious of the motives behind any Western funding, 
these projects will require careful implementation to avoid 
endangering the local organizations.  While Embassy 
representatives will be able to occasionally visit the 
organizations or project sites in conjunction with general 
Embassy business, and the organizations will be able to 
provide full accounting for all funding, any overt 
acknowledgement of the projects as State Department funded 
activities could jeopardize the local organizations.  For 
this same reason, funding would have to be disbursed in cash 
rather than bank transfers (which are monitored). 
 
¶3. (U)  Please direct any questions on the proposals or 
logistical arrangements to the Embassy point of contact: 
Political Officer John Haynes.  The proposals have been sent 
by e-mail to EAP/BCLTV, Burma Desk. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Begin text of proposals: 
 
PROJECT ONE - ETHNIC MINORITY DIALOGUE INITIATIVES 
 
Background:  The Metta and Shalom Foundations (local NGO's) 
recently formed the Ethnic Mediators Fellowship (EMF) ) a 
group of 25 key persons from various ethnic groups who are 
directly involved in political mediation in Burma.  These 
individuals are involved in facilitating dialogue within 
their own ethnic groups in order to develop a greater sense 
of unity and common vision. The EMF is a key group 
strategically placed to support dialogue within ethnic groups 
and collaborative efforts across ethnic lines. Though the 
overall EMF group is currently being provided with training 
and consultations, individual ethnic teams are often 
underfunded and unable to move the dialogue process forward 
within their own ethnic group. 
 
Goal:  Enhance and encourage the dialogue processes within 
three ethnic groups by assisting with the logistical expenses 
of the mediator teams. 
 
Budget:  $15,000 for one year. 
 
Expected Outcome:  Three ethnic groups will have planned and 
conducted dialogue sessions within their ethnic communities. 
The experience gained from these dialogue sessions will 
inform the groups, thinking about future processes and will 
assist in establishing dialogue as a means by which conflict 
can be addressed. 
 
PROJECT TWO: SUMMER SCHOOL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
Background:  Few opportunities exist in Burma for youth to 
develop the requisite skills to be productive members of a 
functioning democracy. The formal education program uses only 
rote memorization and few models exist which promote critical 
thinking skills.  Though the formal educational system has 
been constrained by the military government policies of the 
past 40 years, informal mechanisms exist to build these 
capabilities. One such possibility is through the summer 
youth camps conducted by private cultural, social, and 
religious groups.  These youth camps already teach ethnic 
minority languages, art, music, and other activities. A group 
of motivated individuals can supplement the existing programs 
with approaches which enhance creativity and critical 
thinking skills. Assistance is needed, however, in developing 
a curricula and training an initial group of teachers to 
pilot such a program. 
 
Goal:  Enhance the creative, critical thinking, and 
communication skills of youth. 
 
Budget:  $10,000 for one year. 
 
Expected Outcome:  Curricula will have been developed, 5 
teachers will have been trained, and the curricula tested 
during the March - May 2004 school holiday. 
 
PROJECT THREE - NON-FORMAL CIVIC EDUCATION PROGRAM 
 
Background:  There has been growing interest by civic 
organizations in Burma who are looking for ways to implement 
a non-formal civic education curriculum in boarding hostels, 
vocational training programs, summer camp and school 
programs, as well as other venues.  The program desired would 
teach students about self-governance and participation, 
conflict resolution, respect for diversity and social 
responsibility. 
The Myanmar Institute of Theology (MIT) would like to better 
develop a civic education curriculum that was developed in 
the late 1990,s, implemented by the Kachin Baptist 
Convention (KBC).  This curriculum continues to be used in 
the KBC,s boarding hostels around the country.  MIT proposes 
to build upon the KBC,s civic education curriculum, and make 
it more broadly available for use by other groups and in 
other settings.  This will require a review of the curriculum 
and its adaptation to other cultural settings. 
 
MIT has the ability to provide the monitoring, reporting and 
accounting required for this project, as well as to provide 
staff to implement the technical aspects of this project, in 
conjunction with other resources available in the community. 
 
Goal:  Revise and update a civic education curriculum and 
make it available for use in multiple, non-formal education 
settings in Burma. 
 
Budget:  $10,000 for one year. 
 
PROJECT FOUR - KAREN DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE CIVIL EDUCATION 
AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
 
Background:  The Karen Development Committee (KDC) is an 
unofficially organized, nationwide group of Karen community 
members who are actively supporting and undertaking programs 
for the social and political development of all Karen people 
in Burma.  KDC membership draws from all the major regions 
where Karen people live, as well as all the ethnic subgroups, 
and religious backgrounds. 
 
Objectives:  During 2003-4, the KDC is forming chapters in 
the five geographic regions where Karen people are 
concentrated, and is seeking financial assistance to 
undertake the objectives of: 
 
-- Planning and establishing the KDC regional networks of 
people in these areas to undertake social organizing, 
encourage dialogue between intra-ethnic factions, and 
implement development projects; and 
 
-- Conducting workshops in the regions on topics which could 
include social organizing; civic education; peace education; 
planning for development projects; the faces of power; and 
women and development. 
 
The Karen Development Committee has the capacity to provide 
for accounting, monitoring and reporting for the use of any 
funds received. 
 
Budget:  US$15,000 is requested for one year. 
 
End text of proposals. 
Martinez