This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 001674 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SMIG CVIS PREL PGOV PINS PINR GT
SUBJECT: RECENT GOG ACTIONS TO COMBAT ALIEN SMUGGLING 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The GOG cooperated fully with us in the 
expulsion through the US of alien smuggler Karla Chavez, 
wanted by US law enforcement authorities in connection with 
the May 13 death of 19 illegal aliens in Victoria, Texas. 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez also informed the Ambassador that 
the GOG was replacing a large number of Consuls believed to 
be involved in inappropriate issuance of visas to intending 
immigrants to the US, in response to complaints by the 
Ambassador that new GOG visa regulations would favor alien 
smuggling.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On June 14, Guatemalan immigration authorities 
expelled alleged alien smuggler Karla Chavez Joya to her 
native Honduras, through Houston, where she was arrested by 
US law enforcement authorities in connection with the deaths 
of 19 illegal aliens in Victoria, Texas on May 13.  Chavez is 
believed to be the head of the smuggling ring responsible for 
the incident in Victoria, Texas.  The June 13-14 operation, 
which resulted in Chavez's arrest by Guatemalan authorities 
for an immigration violation and her subsequent expulsion to 
Honduras via Houston, was carefully coordinated between the 
DHS office in Embassy Guatemala and GOG Immigration Director 
Oscar Contreras and his deputy Ramon Canek.  Guatemalan 
cooperation was critical to the success of this operation. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On June 24, Foreign Minister Edgar Gutierrez 
informed the Ambassador that the GOG had taken a number of 
measures to address concerns raised earlier by the Ambassador 
that new Guatemalan visa policy (i.e. increased flexibility 
for issuing Guatemalan visas for nationals of certain Latin 
American countries with high illegal immigration rates) could 
result in increased transit through Guatemala of illegal 
aliens heading to the US.  Gutierrez told the Ambassador that 
indeed the GOG believes that inappropriate issuance of 
Guatemalan visas by a number of consuls had contributed to 
this problem, and that as a result of an extensive 
investigation, the MFA had decided to replace all of its 
consular officials in Mexico, El Salvador, Honduras, 
Colombia, Ecuador and the Dominican Republic.  Gutierrez said 
that the new consuls would be drawn exclusively from the 
MFA's professional consular corps, and that they would 
undergo training on immigration fraud before being sent to 
their new posts. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment:  The recent GOG actions to combat alien 
smuggling, responding to our specific requests, will create 
further disincentives for alien smugglers to see Guatemala as 
a country of safe passage. 
HAMILTON