This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KGLB SENV MV CE OEXC
SUBJECT: GLOBE (Global Learning and Observations to 
Benefit the Environment) Program Update: Sri Lanka 
and Maldives 
 
REF:  State 06351 
 
¶1.  Below is the GLOBE program update for Sri Lanka 
and Maldives: 
 
Sri Lanka 
--------- 
 
¶2.  Post is pleased to report the implementation of 
the GLOBE program in Sri Lanka.  The Ministry of 
Human Resource Development, Education and Culture 
(MHREC) conducted the first three GLOBE teacher- 
training programs in late 2002.  Econ Officer and 
USAEP director attended the inaugural training 
workshop and formally presented training kits to 
attendees.  As of early January 2003, 42 secondary 
school teachers have been trained in GLOBE 
protocols and computer use.  In addition, GLOBE 
clubs have been formed in about 30 schools.  The 
GLOBE program is now being implemented in these 
schools. 
 
¶3. Although Sri Lanka signed the GLOBE agreement in 
December 1999 and 4 trainers attended an 
international workshop, actual implementation of 
the program was delayed for several years due to 
government budgetary constraints.  In 2002, Post 
provided a $20,000 (Rs 2.18 million) grant to the 
Sri Lanka GLOBE program from funds available under 
an earlier PL416(B) food aid grant.  MHREC is 
utilizing these funds for conducting teacher- 
training workshops.  In addition, a recent USAEP 
grant enabled an officer in charge of the GLOBE 
program at MHREC to attend this month's training 
workshop in New Zealand.  Her attendance is 
expected to give a further boost to the 
implementation of the program in Sri Lanka.   Post 
will continue to support GLOBE through USAEP 
assistance and informal supervision and guidance. 
 
Maldives 
-------- 
 
¶4.  The Government of Maldives notified Post in 
2002 that it is ready to sign the GLOBE agreement. 
Once the amended agreement, changing the US party 
from NOAA to NASA, is approved, Post expects to 
begin arrangements for a signing ceremony with the 
Maldivian government. 
 
Wills