This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 001026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/09/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PREF IZ CA CIDA AID
SUBJECT: CANADA: RESPONDING TO IRAQ HUMANITARIAN APPEALS, 
CONSIDERING RECONSTRUCTION ROLE 
 
REF: A. STATE 89192 B. STATE 90025 
 
Classified By: Pol MC Brian Flora for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) We delivered ref A talking points on April 7 to Norman 
Macdonnell, Chief of Operations for International 
Humanitarian Assistance at the Canadian International 
Development Agency (CIDA). On April 8, poloff met with 
Mcdonnell, Louise Marchand, CIDA's Director General for 
International Assistance, Mario Renaud, Director General for 
CIDA's North Africa and Middle East programs, and Daniel 
Joly, Director of CIDA's Iraq task force, to receive a 
response and to discuss CIDA's possible participation in Iraq 
reconstruction efforts. 
 
¶2. (C) Macdonnell agreed that our record of Canada's total 
contribution to the Iraq humanitarian response, approximately 
U.S. $70 million, is correct. In response to the first round 
of humanitarian appeals, CIDA announced on March 26 the 
allocation of C$20 million (U.S. $13 million), as follows: $4 
million to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); 
$4 million to UNICEF; $6.3 million to the World Food Program; 
$600,000.00 to the Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA); $3.5 million to the 
International Committee of the Red Cross; $1 million to the 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies; and $600,000.00 to CARE Canada (figures are in 
Canadian dollars). 
 
¶3. (C) Macdonnell indicated CIDA is close to reaching a 
decision on the size and allocation of the next tranche of 
Canada's contribution, and will consider the March 28 U.N. 
flash appeal and any subsequent flash appeals in making that 
decision. He said CIDA Minister Susan Whelan has an open mind 
about increasing the total amount of Canada's contribution 
beyond the C$100 million committed to date. Director General 
Marchand commented that countries have been very generous in 
responding to appeals for Iraq humanitarian assistance, and 
she didn't think there would be a problem in meeting future 
Iraq relief appeals. 
 
¶4. (C) With regard to Canadian participation in the 
reconstruction of Iraq, Renaud said the preliminary thinking 
is that Canada will participate, but Prime Minister Chretien 
has made no official decision on the role Canada will play. 
Renaud emphasized that it is Canada's preference to work 
through the U.N. on reconstruction efforts, but added that 
the U.N. and other international bodies should act as 
partners with the coalition. (Note: In April 8 remarks on the 
floor of the House of Commons, Prime Minister Chretien stated 
that Canada is in agreement with Prime Minister Blair that 
the U.N. "must be closely involved in the process of 
reconstructing Iraq. But I think it would be impossible for 
the U.N. to do it all alone. And we are ready to help as soon 
as possible." End note.) 
 
¶5. (C) Renaud emphasized the importance of taking a 
comprehensive approach to reconstruction, and cited several 
specific areas where he thinks Canada could make a 
contribution. With respect to the political and economic 
aspects of reconstruction, Renaud mentioned the experience 
Canadians have in municipal governance, central banking 
systems, currency management, the development of trade 
policies, and drafting constitutions. For internal security 
reform, Renault suggested Canada could play a role in the 
training of police forces, and in organizing correctional 
services. Renault doesn't believe reconstruction will take a 
long time, perhaps 3-5 years, and that with its oil resources 
Iraq should be in the top tier of developing countries by the 
end of the  reconstruction period. (Comment:  Renaud's 
mention of specific areas in which Canada would participate 
tracks with a statement made by Canadian Ambassador Kergin to 
Under Secretary Grossman, at their April 4 meeting in 
Washington (ref B), that the GOC wants to find some 
particular contribution it can make to reconstruction. End 
comment.) 
 
 
CELLUCCI