This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 007738 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/17/2013 
TAGS: ASEC PREL PTER TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH TURKISH INTERIOR 
MINISTER AKSU: COUNTERTERRORISM/COUNTERINTEL COOPERATION 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman, E. O. 12958, 
reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Ambassador emphasized to Interior Minister 
Aksu U.S. willingness to offer FBI-sponsored training and to 
arrange visits to the U.S. terrorism counterintelligence 
center.  Ambassador also raised concerns about Turkish 
airport security and lack of visa requirement for Iranians. 
Aksu welcomed the training offers; claimed he had fixed the 
airport problems but asked aides to make sure; and said the 
GOT would require visas for Iranians as part of EU 
harmonization.  Aksu also spoke to CODEL Cox (Homeland 
Security Committee) by telephone.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (U) In a December 16 meeting, Ambassador thanked Interior 
Minister Aksu for the physical security Turkish police are 
providing to the U.S. Mission in Turkey.  The Ambassador 
explained that, due to crew rest issues, CODEL Cox was unable 
to come to Ankara to meet Aksu as planned. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Ambassador noted that U.S. and Turkish law 
enforcement authorities have worked together effectively in 
the past and spotlighted training opportunities in the U.S. 
that will facilitate cooperation in the future.  Two Turkish 
experts would be welcome to attend an FBI-sponsored large 
vehicle bomb post-blast investigation course in January. 
Turkish police would be welcome to attend other courses at 
the FBI Academy; the Ambassador provided Aksu a 
Turkish-language copy of the course descriptions.  Turkish 
police and Turkish National Intelligence Organization (TNIO) 
officials are invited to visit the U.S.'s terrorism 
counterintelligence center.  Welcoming the offers, Aksu 
recalled he had participated in and encouraged similar 
programs during his prior stint as Interior Minister. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Ambassador underscored U.S. concerns about Turkish 
airport security.  Currently there is no enforcement of the 
requirement that airline passengers clear immigration and 
customs at their first point of entry.  Instead, this is 
being done at the final destination.  Aksu claimed he had 
changed the procedure one month ago.  Ambassador asked if 
Aksu is certain his order has been implemented, or whether 
the procedure has reverted instead to a "honor system" 
relying on passengers to identify themselves as coming from 
foreign-origin flights.  Aksu asked an aide to look into the 
matter. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Ambassador also noted U.S. concern about the lack of 
a Turkish visa requirement for Iranians.  According to press 
accounts, one of the suspects in the November Istanbul 
bombings reportedly traveled back and forth between Turkey 
and Iran; this is an area Turkey needs to review.  Aksu 
replied that Turkey will impose a visa requirement on 
Iranians as part of EU harmonization.  Turkey is imposing the 
visa requirement on various countries in tranches; Iran's 
group will come "soon," he claimed.  "It's in the pipeline," 
an aide volunteered. 
 
 
¶6.  (U) At the conclusion of the meeting, CODEL Cox called 
Aksu by telephone and the two spoke cordially for several 
minutes. 
EDELMAN