This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 001818 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA DIBBLE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/27/2013 
TAGS: PREL YM IZ DEMARCHE
SUBJECT: YEMENI FM QIRBI SUGGESTS IRAQI GOVERNING COUNCIL 
SOLICIT ARAB LEAGUE ACCEPTANCE 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 215824 AND PREVIOUS 
 
     ¶B. (B) MUSCAT 1621 
     ¶C. (C) SANAA 1788 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for reasons 1.5 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (u) This is an action request.  See comment/request in 
paragraph 5. 
 
¶2. (c) In a meeting with FM Qirbi on July 27, the Ambassador 
lauded the formation of the IGC and its recent participation 
in the UNSC meeting in New York.  He noted UN SYG Annan's 
supportive statements and Special Representative de Mello's 
supporting role in helping the IGC to begin the process of 
normalizing Iraq by naming ministers and ambassadors, writing 
a new Constitution and preparing for elections.  He strongly 
urged Yemen to make public statements in support of the IGC 
and provided the talking points in reftel a as a non-paper. 
 
¶3. (c) In response to the demarche, Qirbi said Iraq is on the 
agenda for the next Arab League ministerial in September and 
indicated that the ROYG would follow the Arab League's 
decisions on the IGC,  According to Qirbi, the need for the 
IGC to have backing of the Iraqi people in the form of 
constitutional status was discussed at a meeting of Arab 
League countries and until the formulation of such a 
government, Yemen views the "alliance" (coalition) as being 
the "rulers" of Iraq. 
 
¶4. (c) In response to the question of whether Iraq would be 
allowed a representative at the League's meeting of foreign 
ministers, Qirbi suggested that IGC members might be 
permitted to address the League in their "personal" 
capacities.  He also suggested the need for a "roadmap" for 
how the Arab League and its members will work with the UN to 
benefit Iraq.  He asked whether or not the coalition wants 
Arab participation in resolving Iraq-related issues and what 
Arab countries' role would be in supporting coalition 
objectives.  Qirbi stated that Yemen sees the key goals as: a 
democratic state with a new Constitution, ending "occupation" 
and re-integrating Iraq into the region. 
 
¶5. (c) Comment/action request: The upcoming Arab League 
ministerial in September could be an opportunity to gain 
broad Arab acceptance of the IGC, if the UNSC precedent is 
followed.  We recommend that the Department build early 
support among sympathetic Arab League members for such a 
step. End comment/action request. 
HULL