This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 005235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/NGA, NEA/ARP, EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR PGOV KU PL
SUBJECT: (U) AMBASSADOR AND POLISH PRIME MINISTER DISCUSS 
IRAQ 
 
Classified By: CDA Frank C. Urbancic for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary and Introduction: The Ambassador met with 
Polish PM Leszek Miller on November 10, 2003 at Bayan Palace, 
prior to the Prime Minister,s scheduled visit to Iraq. 
Discussion centered on coalition efforts in Iraq, including 
Ambassador Jones,s new responsibilities in Baghdad.  The PM 
expressed Poland,s continued interest in reconstruction 
efforts in Iraq, but urged the USG to speed up the transition 
of authority to the Iraqi people.  Also present at the 
meeting were Dr. Boguslaw Zaleski, Deputy Minister of the 
Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Polish Ambassador to 
Kuwait, Wojciech Bozek.  End Summary and Introduction. 
 
¶2. (C) The Ambassador began the meeting by offering the PM 
his condolences upon the death of a Polish coalition member 
in Iraq.  He stressed that although the coalition was taking 
casualties in Iraq, the situation on the ground was different 
from the impression one might get from the international 
media.  The Ambassador described his new role in Iraq as a 
reflection of the fact that the effort in Iraq was entering a 
new phase.  He said that while the overall goal would be for 
the CPA to work itself out of a job, his role would be to try 
and increase the responsiveness and transparency of the CPA 
by providing outreach to the IGC and the Iraqi people.  The 
Ambassador noted that Poland, as a country with a wealth of 
experience in transitioning from an authoritarian government 
with a command economy to a free-market democracy, could have 
much to contribute in Iraq. 
 
¶3. (C) PM Miller thanked the Ambassador for his comments, and 
agreed that Poland would have much to offer in Iraq.  He said 
Poland would always share its knowledge where helpful. 
 
¶4. (C) Miller, who had met with Kuwaiti PM Shaykh Sabah  and 
Speaker of the National Assembly, Jassem Al-Khorafi earlier 
in the day, said the Kuwaitis had asked him to share with the 
USG their concern about the situation in Iraq.  Miller said 
the Kuwaitis had said they believe &more political 
instruments are needed8 in Iraq, and that the establishment 
of a constitution and holding of elections, along with the 
transfer of authority to an Iraqi governing body, should be 
key goals of the CPA.  He said PM Sabah and Speaker Khorafi 
had both expressed concern that political elements begin to 
replace the largely military effort in Iraq.  Miller noted 
that this was logical, but difficult to do in practice. 
 
¶5. (C) Miller said Polish troops &should be there until the 
Iraqis take responsibility,8 but admitted that not having 
any timeline for this was a cause for concern, as maintaining 
a military presence in Iraq came at considerable financial 
cost to Poland.  The Coalition should do everything possible 
to speed up the process in Iraq, he said, offering Poland,s 
support and expertise in the endeavor.  The PM explained that 
more than 40,000 Polish workers had worked in Iraq in the 
1960,s, 70,s and 80,s building the country,s 
infrastructure, and Polish companies with prior experience in 
Iraq were waiting for the opportunity to be involved in 
reconstruction efforts.  Miller said that Poles were 
beginning to ask what they are getting in return for having 
supported the US politically and militarily.  &American 
business will always have a presence (in Iraq),8 Miller 
said, &but so far for us it has not been fruitful.8 
 
¶6. (C) Looking at the region from a broader perspective, 
Miller said Poland harbors ambitions of becoming more 
involved in the Middle East and Asia, as what will happen 
here will have &enormous consequences for the world.8 
Miller said Poland,s cooperation with the US was its 
pleasure, adding that the US could count on Poland to meet 
its commitments. 
 
¶7. (C) Deputy Foreign Minister Zaleski said he had traveled 
the region extensively, and the message leaders here passed 
to him is that they want more &internationalization.8 
Specific to Iraq, he said they had suggested the 
establishment of a policy board to make policy and 
reconstruction decisions.  Zaleski noted that the CPA's 
Council for  International Coordination was headed by a Pole, 
Ambassador Marek Belka, and expressed his optimism that the 
Ambassador would work with Belka in his new capacity in Iraq. 
  As for Polish economic involvement in reconstruction, he 
reiterated that Polish companies were still waiting for their 
turn.  &If only US companies are involved in 
reconstruction,8 he said, &no one will believe this was 
done for the Iraqi people.8 
 
¶8. (C) On Polish expertise in rebuilding and transforming the 
economy, Zaleski said Poland had made many mistakes, but at 
least it had an idea of where it was going.  He argued that 
the situation in Iraq was much different, and the problems 
were compounded by sectarianism and a lack of consensus about 
what path to take. Zaleski warned that the establishment of a 
federation in Iraq would be destabilizing, and urged the 
adoption of a constitution similar to Lebanon,s as a 
possible option. 
 
¶9. (C) The PM ended the meeting by wishing the Ambassador 
success, noting that the road ahead would be foggy and full 
of surprises.  He offered Poland,s support wherever helpful 
and necessary.  The Ambassador thanked the PM, and explained 
that while we would rely on our allies to tell us when they 
think we are making mistakes, we would most certainly, in the 
words of Lincoln, not be able to &please all of the people 
all of the time.8 
 
¶10. (C) Ambassador Jones did not have a chance to clear this 
cable before departing for temporary duty in Baghdad. 
 
¶11. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
URBANCIC