This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SANAA 000518 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR L/LEI, S/CT; DOJ FOR DAAG BRUCE SWARTZ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/17/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL PGOV KJUS ASEC GM YM TERFIN
SUBJECT: ISLAH PARTY MODERATE ON AL-MOAYED 
 
REF: A. SANAA 127 
     ¶B. SANAA 482 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Deputy Chief Catherine J. Westley for Reasons 1 
.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  An Islah party leader entertained the 
possibility of al-Moayed's guilt after hearing evidence from 
the U.S. complaint.  P/E DepChief met with Islah party 
political director Mohamed Qahtan on March 17 and discussed 
the case of Sheikh Mohammed Ali al-Moayed, who is an Islah 
party Shura Council member (ref a).  Qahtan was somewhat 
persuaded that al-Moayed might be guilty, particularly in 
regards to the evidence of jihad trainee sponsorship gathered 
in Afghanistan.  Qahtan, a noted party moderate, had 
requested the meeting to discuss his concerns about the 
increased danger to Americans as more anti-war demonstrations 
occur between now and the April 27 parliamentary elections 
(septel).  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  P/E DepChief verbally briefed Qahtan about the U.S. 
complaint against al-Moayed and highlighted its most 
compelling evidence.  She said that the case was very strong 
and the Islah party should consider whether it wants to 
actively support al-Moayed.  She noted the case is now in the 
German court system. 
 
¶3.  (C)  On the evidence presented, Qahtan was less impressed 
with the informant-produced evidence, skeptical like others 
cited in the Yemeni press about the $20 million figure of 
money donated to al-Qaeda and was surprised and troubled 
about the evidence from Afghanistan showing jihad trainee 
sponsorship.  He asked if the sponsorship was before 1997 and 
P/E DepChief said no, it was 2000.  He looked very concerned 
at this piece of evidence and said if that were true, Qahtan 
did not know al-Moayed at all.  He repeated that he simply 
could not believe al-Moayed could be involved in al-Qaeda, 
but said perhaps al-Moayed is a very good actor.  He cracked 
a bit of a joke and said if al-Moayed was proven guilty, the 
Islah party would sue to get their donations to his charity 
back.  (Note: P/E DepChief avoided mentioning Hamas and 
concentrated on al-Qaeda.  End Note) 
 
¶4.  (C)  Qahtan said he had read a report from a Yemeni 
student in Germany who visited al-Moayed in jail.  The report 
alleged that al-Moayed was being kept in solitary confinement 
without anything to keep him busy (books, radio) and that an 
interpreter was not provided when doctors visited (causing 
health problems) nor when meals were served (creating 
problems in relation to religious restrictions).  Qahtan said 
he hoped al-Moayed was being treated well and asked that the 
American Embassy do something to ensure it.  P/E DepChief 
said she had not heard anything about mistreatment and that 
Qahtan should contact German authorities if he had concerns. 
Qahtan thanked her for the information and said he would 
follow the case as it moves through the German courts. 
 
¶5.  (C)  Qahtan also said that al-Moayed's sons had received 
phone calls soon after their father's arrest in Germany 
encouraging them to kidnap a German citizen in retaliation. 
He said that the sons thought these to come from members of 
the security forces.  Post cannot confirm this allegation. 
 
¶6.  (C)  The al-Moayed case continues to get high publicity 
and political play, and the typical view of the case by many, 
including the government (ref b), is that he could not be 
involved with al-Qaeda.  Members of the Khowlan tribe have 
been camping out in front of the President's Palace for days 
demanding ROYG action on the matter.  Widespread scorn and 
derision exists from government to journalistic circles about 
the $20 million donation figure quoted in the press and cited 
in the U.S. complaint. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Comment:  Post succeeded in planting a seed of doubt 
with at least one member of the Islah party regarding 
al-Moayed's guilt.  However, Qahtan is a noted moderate and 
his atypical reaction is because he is perhaps more amenable 
to persuasion than others in his party.  End Comment. 
HULL