This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS  ROME 003770 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O.  12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAGR PREF WFP UN
SUBJECT: WFP RESPONDS ON REFUGEE PIPELINE FUNDING FOR 
TANZANIA 
 
REF: A) STATE 134859, B) DAR ES SALAAM 1536 
 
¶1. Summary: the World Food Program's Director of 
Fundraising and Donor Relations was not in a position to 
respond to why refugee rations remained at reduced levels 
given the previously reported USG contribution (REF B) as 
well as contributions from ECHO and the Government of 
Belgium, but she promised to look into the matter. 
 
¶2. WFP confirmed that the 10 million Euro contribution from 
ECHO had been received and indicated that they were working 
towards securing an additional 10 million EURO contribution 
from Europe Aid for the Tanzanian PRRO.  WFP stressed that 
they do not view the State PRM contributions as a component 
of core funding; rather, they see State PRM funding as an 
extremely helpful tool in their efforts to fill gaps in the 
delivery of food aid.  End Summary. 
 
¶3.  The U.S. Mission to the U.N. Agencies for Food and 
Agriculture's (FODAG) Humanitarian Attach Timothy Lavelle 
and Project Budget Specialist John Brooks met with WFP's 
Director of Fundraising Valerie Sequeira and Resources 
Officer Rose Linda Barbuto to discuss:  WFP's strategy for 
eliciting funding from non-traditional sources in support 
of its refugee feeding program in Tanzania, the status of 
the financial contribution from the European Commission 
Humanitarian Office (ECHO) for refugees in Tanzania, and 
WFP's reporting rationale as it relates to donor 
contributions. 
 
 
¶4.  While the meeting was mildly productive, it was 
apparent that a number of the questions being posed to WFP 
headquarters staff would have been better received on the 
country level.  As FODAG will be participating in a joint 
Mission to Uganda and Tanzania later in the week with State 
PRM's Mary Margaret Knudson, it was communicated that a 
number of the more detailed questions should be posed to 
WFP staff in the field. 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Identifying non-traditional funding sources 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  WFP acknowledged the importance of attracting non- 
traditional donors to the effort to feed refugees.  And 
while they are always on the lookout for creative solutions 
to their resourcing needs, they were not able to 
immediately identify any country that would be sympathetic 
to the needs of refugees in Tanzania  beyond those that 
have already contributed.  WFP encouraged FODAG to 
recommend other countries that might be in a position to 
help. 
 
---------------------- 
European contributions 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  WFP reported that the 10 million Euro (approximately 
USD 10.5 million) contribution from ECHO had been received. 
 
¶7.  WFP also reported that they were working to secure an 
additional 10 million Euro from Europe Aid for the 
Tanzanian PRRO.  WFP expects this would-be contribution to 
be confirmed within the next two weeks. 
 
 
------------------- 
Reporting rationale 
------------------- 
 
¶8.  WFP informed FODAG that only confirmed contributions 
are reported.  In short, unless WFP has a signed commitment 
letter from a would-be donor, it is not reported.  The 
donor's intent to contribute is not reportable. 
 
 
---------- 
Next steps 
---------- 
 
¶9.  During the joint US Mission/Rome-State PRM visit to 
Uganda and Tanzania commencing August 22, every opportunity 
will be seized upon to follow-up on these issues from the 
field level.  BERTON 
 
 
NNNN 
2003ROME03770 - Classification: UNCLASSIFIED