This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/03/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ: TURKS REMAIN CONCERNED ABOUT KURDISH 
INFLUENCE AND SEEK ANSWERS TO THE "ZIYAL LIST" 
 
REF: A. DUNNIGAN-SILVERMAN EMAIL (MATRIX) 
     ¶B. ANKARA 3975 
     ¶C. ZIYAL PAPER PROVIDED JUNE 16 
 
 
¶1. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Classified by DCM Robert Deutsch.  Reasons:  1.5 (B 
and D). 
 
 
¶3. (C) Action Request: Refs A and B list GOT offers of 
assistance related to the reconstruction and stability of 
Iraq, for which Post has requested guidance from the 
Department or OCPA.  DG for Mideast Affairs Burcuoglu 
convoked the DCM July 2 to raise several points of GOT 
concern (see below), including concerning the Turkish 
proposals cited previously in Refs A-C.  Embassy looks 
forward to receiving Department's guidance on ref A issues, 
as well as those raised by Burcuoglu. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Summary: DG for Mideast Affairs Burcuoglu convoked 
the DCM July 2 to discuss several issues of concern to the 
GOT.  According to Burcuoglu: 
-- the disarmament of all groups in northern Iraq except the 
Kurds will create tensions and gives the impression that 
Kurdish predominance in Iraq is predetermined; 
-- Turkmen underrepresentation on the "Iraqi Political 
Advisory Committee" would be detrimental to the future of 
Iraqi democracy (Turkmen should be the third largest group 
represented among the 25-30 members); 
-- the KDP levying of ad hoc taxes and fees at the Habur gate 
is obstructing the return to normalcy of commercial traffic; 
-- the GOT is still waiting for a US response on the GOT's 
intention to reopen its consulate in Mosul; 
-- the Turkish embassy in Baghdad, like many others, 
continues to have difficulties finding points of contact at 
CPA and hopes the USG can facilitate this.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶5. (C) DG Burcuoglu convoked the DCM July 2 to raise numerous 
concerns regarding events in Iraq, but first he expressed the 
GOT's sympathy for the casualties coalition forces in Iraq 
were sustaining on an almost daily basis.  He added that the 
US's success in Iraq was also a success for Iraq and for 
Turkey.  Burcuoglu emphasized that the main issue of concern 
regarding events in Iraq was the coalition decision to disarm 
all groups in northern Iraq except the Kurds, which the GOT 
believed was discriminatory and provocative.  Furthermore 
giving the Kurds the authority to approve other groups' 
licenses to carry small arms gave the impression that Kurdish 
authority in the north was predetermined, even though the 
interim authority had not yet even been established.   He 
cited as an example a June 23 press conference in which a US 
LTC implied that among the 404th Civil Affairs Battalion's 
goals were to support the Kurdish authority in northern Iraq. 
 Burcuoglu pressed for the USG to allow Assyrians and Turkmen 
to carry small arms for self-protection without the need for 
Kurdish approval. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Burcuoglu's second item of GOT concern was the 
composition of the "Iraqi Political Advisory Committee."  He 
noted that the GOT expected the Turkmen to be the third 
largest group on the 25-30 person body, as their exclusion or 
underrepresentation would be detrimental to the future of 
Iraqi democracy.  In the same vein, the GOT expected the US 
to address the situation in Kirkuk, which he said was heavily 
favoring Kurdish influence there. 
 
 
¶7. (C) On the issue of the Habur gate, the GOT was in the 
process of normalizing the commercial flow of traffic through 
that crossing, but the KDP on the Iraqi side was levying fees 
and taxes at will and disrupting that flow.  Burcuoglu asked 
that the US take control of the Iraqi side of the border 
(from the KDP) or at least increase the US presence to 
prevent the KDP from creating problems.  (Comment: The KDP 
denies that it is charging any taxes or fees, and the GOT 
denies that it is creating long queues by submitting 
transporters to intense scrutiny/bureaucracy.  In addition, 
the truckers are undoubtedly complicating the situation by 
smuggling goods or claiming that they are paying fees they 
are probably pocketing.  End Comment.) 
 
 
¶5. (C) Burcuoglu then asked to follow up on two items that 
Ziyal raised in Washington on which the GOT is awaiting a 
reply: opening a Turkish consulate in Mosul and establishing 
better points of contact between the Turkish embassy in 
Baghdad and CPA.  On the first, Burcuoglu said the GOT would 
like to send a couple of diplomats, probably accompanied by a 
couple of security personnel, to re-establish the Turkish 
consulate in Mosul.  He noted that if, like the embassy in 
Baghdad, the US discouraged but did not prevent the opening 
of this office, the GOT would be satisfied.  On the question 
of POCs at the CPA in Baghdad, Burcuoglu said that other 
diplomats in Baghdad were complaining of the same problem; 
Turkey did not feel discriminated against, but does not 
understand why the fruitful US-TU cooperation conducted in 
Washington and Ankara cannot also occur in Baghdad. 
 
 
¶6. (C) DCM committed to relaying Burcuolgu's concerns to 
Washington and Baghdad.  He asked for patience regarding the 
POCs in Baghdad as the situation/personnel there is 
constantly in flux and communications are not easy for 
anyone. 
PEARSON