This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/ PPC (LYNN) AND PM/B (WESTMORELAND) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/24/2013 
TAGS: PARM PREL MARR MCAP GT
SUBJECT: PROGRESS TOWARD REGIONAL ARMS INVENTORY 
 
 
Classified By: Robert E. Copley for reason 1.5 (b). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: On February 19, Central American Foreign 
Ministers ratified a model format for providing each other 
with information about the composition, armaments, material 
and equipment of their military and police forces.  The 
measure removes another hurdle in establishing a "reasonable 
balance of power" in the region--a fundamental objective of 
the 1995 Framework Treaty on Democratic Security in Central 
America.  The measure is also required as a confidence 
building measure and will serve to shore up the Central 
American Integration System (SICA), which was created by the 
Framework Treaty and will oversee implementation of the 
inventories.  Guatemala Foreign Minister Gutierrez said 
ratification was a tough sell among some of his counterparts. 
 Once implemented, however, Gutierrez believes the measure 
will strengthen arguments for reducing the size of the 
Guatemalan military.  The Ambassador mentioned the measure 
during recent consultations with SouthCom Commander General 
Hill, and suggested that if the inventories appear to be 
going forward, there could be a substantial USG interest in 
enlisting an entity, such as the Inter-American Defense 
Board, to verify them.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Foreign Ministers of Guatemala, El Salvador, 
Honduras, Panama, and Nicaragua, as well as the Vice Foreign 
Minister of Costa Rica and Ambassador Moises Cal of Belize 
met in Panama City on February 19, inter alia, to ratify the 
model format for arms inventories.  Ratification was the 
major hurdle in the approval process for the arms inventories 
begun in August 2001.  The model format requires disclosure 
of information about the composition of naval, land, air and 
security force units as well as their installations, weapons, 
material and equipment.  The model format provides official 
definitions for the types of weapons, vehicles, ships and 
aircraft to be inventoried.  In some cases, such as 
ship-borne radar, the model format requires very specific 
information.  If this initiative goes forward, the resulting 
disclosures among Central American neighbors could greatly 
enhance mutual confidence on the isthmus.  There are 
exemptions in the agreement, however, from providing any 
information that by its nature is reserved in the 
Constitutions of member states.  In the case of Guatemala, 
Ministers of Defense routinely cite article 30 of the 
Constitution when refusing to provide a wide array of 
military information, even to the Guatemalan Congress. 
 
¶3. (C) Foreign Minister Gutierrez told the Ambassador that 
ratifying the model format was very difficult and that four 
of the Ministers in the meeting almost refused to sign. 
Gutierrez was surprised and pleased with the positive 
outcome. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: This appears to be a step forward in the 
initiative of Honduran President Maduro as reported by 
Ambassador Palmer and as discussed December 2002 and February 
2003 during the Chiefs of Mission Conferences.  Whether or 
not the Guatemalan military hides behind its Constitution, 
the value of the inventories as confidence building measures 
would be greatly enhanced if they could be independently 
verified.  Ambassador Hamilton mentioned the model format in 
discussions with Combatant Commander Hill of Southern Command 
February 23, and raised the possibility that the 
Inter-American Defense Board or a similar entity could verify 
the inventories. 
HAMILTON