This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

051118Z Sep 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 LAGOS 001862 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
LONDON FOR GURNEY, PARIS FOR NEARY 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/01/2008 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM ELAB PINR NI
SUBJECT: SOUTHERN SNAPSHOTS - WEEK OF SEPTEMBER 1, 2003 
 
 
REF: LAGOS 1823 AND PREVIOUS 
 
 
Classified By: CONSUL GENERAL ROBYN HINSON-JONES FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AN 
 
 
D (D). 
 
 
Anambra: Impeachment Panel ignores Court injunction 
 
 
¶1. (U)  The Impeachment Panel set up by the Anambra State 
government to investigate Deputy Governor Okey Udeh's role in 
the July 10 failed attempt to forcefully remove Governor 
Chris Ngige from office has ignored an order of the federal 
High Court in Abuja restraining it from further consideration 
of the Udeh case.  Presiding Judge of the High Court Wilson 
Egbo-Egbo ruled on August 26 that all proceedings and actions 
in connection with the impeachment proceeding must be stayed 
indefinitely.  On August 28, two days after the High Court 
order, the Panel met then announced on August 29 that it 
would ignore the Abuja Court's ruling because that court 
lacked jurisdiction to rule on matters concerning impeachment 
proceedings.  Udeh has filed a contempt of court charge 
against the Panel and his lawyer has, in addition, petitioned 
the Nigerian Bar Association to intervene based on what he 
terms the Panel's "abuse of profession and due administration 
of justice."  No date has yet been set for a hearing on the 
charges of contempt. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Comment. The judicial wrangling that has surrounded 
this crisis from its beginning indicates that a resolution to 
the crisis in Anambra State that will be acceptable to all 
parties will be hard to come by.  The Obasanjo 
administration, after initial neutral statements, now has 
gone silent and appears willing to remain neutral while the 
crisis lasts.  Defying a court injunction as the Impeachment 
Panel has done seems a sure indication that Anambra State 
wants to test the strength of Nigeria's fledgling democracy. 
 
 
Abia: "Action Governor" Orji Kalu addresses Nigerian group in 
Houston 
 
 
¶3. (U) Abia State Governor Orji Kalu, in a speech to the Abia 
State National Association meeting in Houston, told the 
audience how he thought some of the problems in the State 
could be addressed.  According to Kalu, the State is in a 
financial bind because the Ministry of Finance and its Debt 
Management Office have taken almost USD 90 million from 
Abia's 2003 federal allocation to service debt of over USD 
600 million that the GON says is Abia's part of the national 
debt.  The State has protested the accuracy of both amounts, 
and Kalu blames the huge amounts going to debt service for 
Abia's inability to provide its citizens with their share of 
the "dividends of democracy" such as regular, on time payment 
of worker salaries, and provision of usual government 
services such as infrastructure repairs.  The Governor touted 
Abia's "numerous economic potentials and rich local 
entrepreneurships" as great opportunities, and suggested this 
area should be explored by foreign investors, especially 
American private businesses.  He went on to say that the US 
and other advanced countries should assist Nigeria with 
investment and technical support to stabilize and grow its 
economy.  He concluded, saying, "Whatever happens to Nigeria 
will have adverse effects on democracy in Africa, and, 
indeed, in the whole world.  The international community, 
particularly America, has a moral duty to work to sustain 
democracy in Nigeria." 
 
 
¶4. (C) Comment. Orji Kalu is one of the Peoples Democratic 
Party's (PDP) stars in the southeast.  He has the personal 
support of President Olusegun Obsanjo who was the first to 
dub Kalu the "Action Governor" because he was so quick to 
initiate major growth and re-building programs for Abia state 
after his election in 1999.  In 2002 Kalu was embroiled in a 
bitter and protracted fight with his Deputy Governor, 
Enyinnaya Abaribe, that saw  Abaribe and his supporters in 
the State Assembly barricaded in the House of Assembly and 
without pay for several months.  When Abaribe decided to 
challenge his boss and also run for Governor, Kalu appointed 
another Deputy and easily won re-election.  On a visit to 
Abia State, PolOffs were impressed with the condition of the 
infrastructure and government facilities in and around the 
State capital of Umuahia.  Kalu was a successful businessman 
before entering politics.  There have already been calls by 
several organizations in Abia for him to run for the 
Presidency in 2007.  It is too early to tell whether Kalu is, 
himself, "testing the waters" for a run at the Presidency or 
whether these are merely attempts by admiring supporters to 
put him forward as a "favorite son" candidate.  End comment. 
 
 
Another nationwide strike is threatened 
 
 
¶5. (U) Renewed talks between the GON and the Nigerian Labor 
Congress (NLC) on the 12.5 per cent pay raise for public 
sector workers ended in a deadlock this week.  The NLC has 
threatened to commence a nationwide strike action on October 
1 if the pay raise isue is not resolved by that date. 
Central to thenegotiation between the GON and labor is a 
goverment offer of between four and six per cent as aganst 
the 12.5 pe 
cent earlier promised by Presidnt Obasanjo. 
The GON negotiating team, led by Secetary to the Government 
of the Federation of Nigria, Ufot Ekaete, said that the 
nation's economycannot withstand paying the promised 12.5 
percent.  Ekaete said that money even to pay the four per 
cent still on the table, would have to be part of a 
supplementary budget now in preparation and soon to be sent 
to the National Assembly. 
 
 
¶6. (C) NLC Assistant General Secretary Denja Yakub told 
PolSpec that the NLC will not settle for anything less than 
the 12.5 per cent promised by Obasanjo.  He said the Congress 
is prepared to commence an indefinite industrial action to 
force the GON to honor its promises.  He said, "They can not 
continue to take us for a ride.  We are prepared to do 
anything to protect the rights of Nigerian workers." 
 
 
¶7. (C) Comment.  The NLC now appears to be fighting many 
battles at the same time.  It has only recently warned that 
it will declare a nationwide strike action should the GON 
further increase the price of petroleum products.  The 
Congress has also protested an alleged plan by the Nigeria 
National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) to lay off 
approximately 2,000  workers.  It is not clear presently what 
the GON's strategy will be to stave off another nationwide 
strike less than two months after a week-long NLC strike to 
protest a fuel price hike nearly shut down the country. 
HINSON-JONES