This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 001409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/19/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PINS MOPS ASEC EPET NI
SUBJECT: WARRI CRISIS UPDATE 19AUG03 
 
REF: ABUJA 13576 AND PREVIOUS 
 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Counselor James Maxstadt for reasons 1.5 
(b) and (d). 
 
 
¶2. (C) Summary:  Violent clashes between Itsekiri and Ijaw 
militants continued in Warri town through August 19, 
according to press reports and local observers in Warri.  The 
death toll since August 15 is at least 50, probably much 
higher.  Governor Ibori is returning from vacation, and the 
military may take action this weekend.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶3. (C) A Nigerian worker for U.S. NGO "IFESH" reported to CRO 
August 19 that intense fighting continued in the morning of 
the 19th and, at one point, army personnel retreated from the 
area of fighting.  By noon, however, fighting had died down 
as the army deployed a larger force to the affected area. 
According to the NGO contact, armed militants of the Egbema 
clan of the Ijaw have joined the FNDIC militants (dominated 
by the Gbaramatu clan of the Ijaw) in the fight against the 
Itsekiri.  FNDIC leader Dan Ekpedibe told CRO in an August 19 
phone conversation that the situation had calmed a bit by 
1600 local in the port area, but the Itsekiris were now 
making attacks on Warri town by land.  He complained that the 
state government was showing a pro-Itsekiri bias during the 
fighting and wanted the federal government to step in and 
take control of Warri affairs. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Delta State Governor James Ibori's personal assistant 
confirmed to CRO that Ibori has broken off his vacation in 
the UK and will return to Warri at noon on August 20.  The 
Governor will immediately tour the Warri town area affected 
by the recent fighting.  He will also convene an emergency 
meeting of ethnic leaders and security forces chiefs. 
 
 
-------------------- 
FOUR SOLDIERS KILLED 
-------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C/NF) The DATT reports that the military task force in 
Warri, consisting of six battalions, is under the command of 
MajGen Qwenbe who has been appointed "Director of Operations 
in Warri."  In an August 19 meeting with DATT, Qwenbe 
confirmed that four army soldiers were killed in exchanges 
with the militants over the August 15-17 weekend.  The 
General also stated that the long-awaited operation against 
the militants would commence over the August 22-24 weekend. 
 
 
------------------------------------------ 
CTX STILL OPERATING, SHELL CLOSED IN WARRI 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
¶6. (C/NF) ChevronTexaco (CTX) General Manager for Public and 
Government Affairs Sola Omole reports that CTX's offices in 
Warri remain open; 90 percent of local staff showed up for 
work today.  Omole also reported to CRO that the Warri 
airport remains open and crew changes to/from the CTX 
terminal at Escravos continue from the Warri airport. 
Shell's Security Manager Mike Achu reports that the Shell 
office in Warri, however, has been closed since August 18 as 
a precaution. 
ROBERTS