This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ABUJA 000328 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR AF AND AF/W 
ALSO FOR INL/E. FLOOD 
 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: MASS SNAR KCRM PGOV NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: ARTICLE 98 DEMARCHE ON NIGERIA'S 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 
 
 
¶1. Ambassador and Regional Narcotics and Law 
Enforcement Officer (RNLEO) met with Attorney 
General Kanu Agabi on 31 January 2003.  In 
addition to formally introducing the new RNLEO to 
the Attorney General, the Ambassador delivered a 
letter on Article 98 Agreements.  The AG said he 
would pass it on to the Solicitor General.  In 
addition, he stated that the GON was looking at 
this issue and would get back to us.  The 
Ambassador explained the American Service 
Protection Act and the impact it would have on our 
robust security assistance relationship as well as 
the implications of Article 98 Agreements for 
Nigeria considering its role in peacekeeping. 
Agabi stated that he would acquaint the President 
with the matter so that when the Ambassador 
discussed the issue, the President would know 
about it. 
 
 
¶2.  On the issue of the Daniel Ohriunu extradition 
case before the court, the AG stated that everything 
was being done to expedite the case, to hear appeals 
quickly and to punish judges that were found to be 
corrupt.  He further stated that he wanted to be in 
court himself but couldn't.  He directed his assistant 
to put the matter on his calendar so that as soon as 
he returned from his trip to New York, he would "take 
over the matter himself." 
 
 
The AG also stated that the Chief Judge of the Federal 
High Court had assured him that she would appoint a 
Judge to be in charge of hearing all extradition 
cases.  The next hearing on the Ohriunu case is 
scheduled for 18 and 19 February.  The AG hoped his 
personal intervention would help accelerate the case 
and get a judgment. 
 
 
¶3. The AG, in his usual frank manner, commented that 
it would be hard to enforce fair elections.  He 
pointed to the primaries stating that he wanted to 
lower expectations that the elections would be "free 
and fair" and meet the standards expected of a mature 
democracy.  "You must bear with us", he said, "Nigeria 
still has a long way to go." 
 
 
JETER