This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 003409 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/23/2008 
TAGS: PGOV PREL CASC PHUM TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR RAISES SECURITY, TIP, CHILD ABDUCTION 
WITH INTERIOR MINISTER 
 
 
REF: A. ANKARA 3314 
     ¶B. ANKARA 3408 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador W.R. Pearson; reasons 1.5 b and 
d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In a May 22 meeting with Interior Minister 
Aksu, Ambassador discussed possible terrorist threats against 
the American community and the GOT's efforts to combat 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP).  Ambassador also sought the 
Minister's assistance in a U.S. child abduction case.  Aksu 
promised cooperation on those issues, and requested 
information on Turkish citizens he said are being held at 
Guantanamo Bay.  End Summary. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
Possible Threats to Embassy, Tourists 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador thanked Aksu for providing enhanced 
security coverage for the Embassy community during the Iraq 
war.  He said cooperation between the Turkish security 
services and Embassy security officers is excellent. 
Ambassador said new information indicates a possible 
terrorist threat against diplomatic missions of the U.S. and 
certain other countries worldwide.  There are also possible 
threats to the broader American community overseas.  In light 
of this, he would appreciate any additional security measures 
Aksu could take.  In addition, Ambassador noted that a number 
of cruise lines have resumed stops at ports in Istanbul and 
Kusadasi.  This is a healthy sign for Turkey's economy. 
However, Ambassador said he is concerned that these ships, 
carrying many American passengers, could be targeted by 
terrorists.  He would appreciate any extra security measures 
the GOT could take.  Aksu said he will contact the Ankara 
governor and security director and ask them to enhance 
security for the Embassy and American community, and will 
also direct the Coast Guard to enhance security for cruise 
ships. 
 
 
------------------ 
Trafficking Report 
------------------ 
 
 
¶3. (C) Ambassador noted Department is preparing the 2003 TIP 
Report for Turkey.  Embassy will continue to pass along 
information from the GOT on TIP to the Department for 
consideration.  Aksu averred that Turkey should not be ranked 
in Tier III in the TIP Report.  He said the GOT takes the 
issue very seriously; Tier III is designated for countries 
that are not making serious efforts to combat human 
trafficking.  Aksu said throughout his career, whenever he 
has participated in international conferences, he has called 
for international cooperation in three areas: drug 
trafficking, terrorism, and TIP.  He argued that the GOT is 
focusing intensely on all three areas, and Turkey should be 
removed from the TIP Report altogether.  It appears that the 
USG wants to rank Turkey in Tier III to create a balance 
among Turkey and other regional countries, but Turkey is far 
more advanced on this issue than its neighbors, he claimed. 
Ambassador said Embassy will keep the Department informed of 
the GOT's views.  He said one area of improvement for the GOT 
might be the process of repatriating TIP victims.  Embassy 
understands victims are sometimes sent to a neighboring 
country that is not their country of origin.  The GOT might 
be able to improve its performance in this area by working 
more closely with the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM).  Aksu claimed the GOT returns all victims to 
their country of origin, and works in close cooperation with 
IOM on repatriation (Note: We will continue to press this 
point.  Regina Boucault, head of the IOM Ankara mission, told 
us May 7 that the GOT is not/not cooperating with IOM on 
repatriations and is sending some victims to countries that 
are not their countries of origin.  End Note). 
 
 
--------------- 
Child Abduction 
--------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ambassador stressed the importance of implementing the 
Hague Convention on Child Abduction.  He noted that the 
Convention requires that abducted children be returned to the 
country from where they were abducted.  It is important that 
countries enforce this provision so that parents are 
discouraged from kidnapping their children and taking them to 
a country where they expect to receive favorable treatment in 
court.  This is an international problem that requires 
international cooperation.  Ambassador thanked Aksu for his 
help with the Sensoy child abduction case (Note: Ambassador 
raised this case with the Justice Minister May 21 -- reftel 
¶A. End Note).  Ambassador discussed this case with Aksu 
December 17, and shortly thereafter the GOT located the 
father.  Later, the Ambassador noted, the judge ruled that 
the child be returned to her mother for the remainder of the 
court process.  However, police have been unable to locate 
the child.  Aksu said he had recently directed police and 
Jandarma officials to locate the child.  He said he supports 
full implementation of all international agreements, and 
hoped to have information soon on the child's whereabouts. 
 
 
-------------------- 
Guantanamo Detainees 
-------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Aksu requested information on six Turkish citizens he 
said are being held at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base.  He said 
the GOT had been receiving information about the detainees, 
but recently there has been no information.  Ambassador said 
he would seek information and respond (see reftel B). 
PEARSON