This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HANOI 000647 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ABUD KNNP TRGY OVIP OPDC VM IAEA
SUBJECT:  VIETNAM ON RIGHTSIZING THE IAEA SFEGUARDS BUDGET 
 
REF:  STATE 13752 
 
¶1.  (U)  In response to reftel letter from Deputy Secretary 
Armitage and demarche on rightsizing the IAEA safeguards 
budget, Standing Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Nguyen 
Dinh Bin responded in a letter dated March 17, 2003 
indicating Vietnam's support for general and complete 
disarmament, the need for adequate resources for the IAEA 
along with further consultation among member states on this 
proposal, and the importance of a balance in funding between 
safeguard and technical assistance activities.  Full text in 
para 2. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Quote 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Socialist Republic of Vietnam 
 
Hanoi, 17 March, 2003 
 
Dear Mr. Deputy Secretary, 
 
I would like to thank you for the letter dated 7 February 
2003 with regard to the proposal of the Director General of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to increase 
the IAEA's regular budget for safeguard in 2004-2005. 
Vietnam has for many years supported general and complete 
disarmament, especially nuclear disarmament and non- 
proliferation.  Vietnam's signing of the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (1982) and Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (1996) and 
being a party to the Treaty on South East Asia Nuclear 
Weapon Free Zone (1995) have all demonstrated our commitment 
and contribution in the joint efforts of the international 
community toward eliminating nuclear weapons and a peaceful 
and more secure world.  I am also of the view that nuclear 
energy has to be utilized for peaceful purposes and in 
service of human life. 
 
The Agency, in fulfilling its mandates effectively, needs to 
be provided with adequate resources.  In this regard, the 
DG's proposal is very important, but it requires that all 
member states work together to reach an agreement on the 
issue.  In addition, it is worth noting that a balance 
should be taken into account in allocating funding for 
safeguard and technical assistance activities. 
 
Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest 
consideration. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
//s// Nguyen Dinh Bin 
Standing Deputy Minister 
 
The Honorable Richard L. Armitage 
Deputy Secretary 
U.S. Department of State 
Washington, DC USA 
end quote 
PORTER