This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 002434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/28/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: SANAA EAC MEETING - SEPTEMBER 28, 2003 
 
REF: SANAA 02410 
 
Classified By: CTC AUSTIN G. GILREATH, for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened an EAC meeting 
on September 28 to consider information provided to the 
Embassy by the ROYG concerning recent disruption of a local 
Al-Qaida cell targeting U.S., other Western, and Yemeni 
objectives.  The new information, provided by Interior 
Minister Alimi in a briefing for the U.S. and four other 
Western embassies, elaborates preliminary information 
provided by President Saleh during GEN Abizaid's 9/20 visit 
(reftel).  While the identified threat has been disrupted, 
the EAC decided to issue a warden message immediately and 
schedule a meeting of wardens later in the week.  The EAC 
also reviewed security measures for upcoming public events 
and USG visitors.  Key offices and personnel represented at 
the meeting included:  POL/ECON, CONS, RSO, MO, FPD, POL/MIL, 
DAO, OMC, and SOC YEMEN.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) DCM opened the 9/28 EAC meeting with a readout of the 
just-concluded briefing by Interior Minister Dr. Rashad 
al-Alimi for key Western embassies.  Attendees at the 
briefing included the Ambassador (accompanied by DCM and 
RSO), the Italian Ambassador, the French Charge, the German 
DCM and the British Ambassador. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
ROYG Briefing: Disruption of new al-Qaida Cell in Sanaa 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶3. (C) Alimi convened the meeting to provide information on 
Yemen's recent disruption of a Sanaa-based al-Qaida cell. 
(Note:  Alimi's briefing elaborated on information initially 
passed by President Saleh in his 9/19 meeting with GEN 
Abizaid (reftel).  End note).  The Minister told attendees 
that the cell had identified a long list of Western targets, 
including: the U.S. Ambassador, the British Embassy, the 
Italian Embassy, and the French Cultural Center.  Other 
targets included the Hadda Compound, Spectrum (a language 
school with no Embassy affiliation), and many senior ROYG 
officials and government buildings. 
 
¶4. (C) Alimi said that only the UK Embassy attack was in 
operational preparation, but noted that the arms and 
explosives to be used in the attack -- which were to be 
obtained in Marib with money sent from Saudi Arabia -- had 
not been received by the Sanaa cell.  He showed tactical 
sketches of the UK Embassy and shared detailed surveillance 
notes obtained from the four arrested members of the cell. 
He promised to provide the UK Ambassador with a copy of video 
surveillance footage of her embassy. 
 
¶5. (C) Alimi stated that the cell had targeted the U.S. 
Ambassador's motorcade for attack on two prior occasions, but 
had been deterred by his security escort.  (Note: 
Ambassador's detail includes both Embassy bodyguards and 
Yemeni police elements.  End note) 
 
¶6. (C) The Interior Minister said that the arrested al-Qaida 
cell members -- led by 'Amr Abdul Rahman al-Sharif, who is in 
custody -- called their group the "Cells of Faith and Unity," 
which was a part of a larger grouping called the "Unification 
Brigades."  He indicated that the ROYG had no previous 
knowledge of this nomenclature, but stressed that the group 
was definitely tied to Al-Qaida.  The individuals arrested 
and currently being held are of Yemeni and Saudi nationality. 
 Alimi added that information about the cell had already been 
shared with Saudi Arabia -- specifically with Deputy Interior 
Minister Mohamed bin Naif, currently in Sanaa.  Alimi added 
that he would also brief the Iranian Ambassador on September 
29 and request Iranian assistance with the investigation, as 
one of the cell members was based in Iran. 
 
¶7. (C) Dr. Alimi told attendees that although the imminent 
threat presented by the operations cell had been dealt with, 
attendees should review security procedures and exercise 
extraordinary caution.  Dr. Al-Alimi said that additional 
ROYG security on targeted facilities had already been put in 
place.  When asked how the ROYG was going to publicize the 
information, he responded that comments would be minimized 
due to the ongoing investigation and the desire to capture 
suspects who remain at large.  When presented with our duty 
to release a warden message, Dr. Al-Alimi agreed to the 
release of non-specific threat information. 
 
---------------- 
EAC Actions 
---------------- 
 
¶8. (C) The EAC agreed to issue a warden message and hold a 
warden meeting within the next few days.  At Alimi's request, 
the warden message will not/not include specific details of 
the disrupted terrorist cell, but will advise wardens of a 
new threat and urge exceptional precautions.  Taking into 
account ROYG security enhancements at Embassy-affiliated 
locations and all other locations on the target list, the EAC 
agreed that the Embassy's current security posture and 
measures were appropriate.  Upcoming social events are to 
proceed as scheduled with necessary security measures in 
place for each.  The DCM reiterated the need to practice 
vigilant personal security and avoid predictability.  Travel 
outside of the capitol will continue to be subject to advance 
consultation with ROYG authorities.  The EAC agreed to defer 
discussion of the Marine ball (set for November 10 on the 
Embassy compound) until a subsequent meeting. 
HULL