This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 000944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/M, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, IIP/G/NEA- 
SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, MARCH 16: IRAQ; FRENCH 
OPPOSITION TO WAR; ANTI-WAR DEMONSTRATIONS 
 
REF: KUWAIT 00900 
 
¶1.   Summary: Kuwaiti commentators lash out at France as the 
embodiment of opposition to war against Saddam's regime. The 
Arab League delegation to the US, and possibly to Baghdad, 
is derided as a "tour group." In an op/ed entitled "A Leader 
is Needed at the White House," one commentator remarks 
baldly: "President Bush can regain (his) leadership by 
giving the order to start the war." 
 
Strong criticism of US policy remains, however, with 
Secretary Rumsfeld being branded as a "criminal" for 
 
SIPDIS 
"providing Saddam with WMD during Iraq's war against Iran." 
Another writer states, "the demonstrations around the world 
may not prevent the US from starting the war, but America 
has lost many of its supporters because of the way it treats 
other nations." 
 
The radical Islamist "Salafist" group in Kuwait defends its 
opposition to what they term a "new Crusade" in Iraq 
(reftel) as "no different from the official Kuwaiti 
position." End Summary. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Shaikh Sabah Al-Ahmad stated ruled out any 
possibility for a diplomatic solution to the Iraq crisis, 
and said that Kuwait's participation in the reconstruction 
of Iraq would be discussed later. 
 
The Undersecretary of the Ministry of Interior for Security 
Services and State Security Major General Abdullah Al-Faris 
denied that the Ministry tortures those who object to the 
American presence in Kuwait as reported in the Arab 
Committee for Human Rights report. 
 
Public prosecution has ordered the detention of five men 
accused of plotting sabotage extended for 21 more days. 
 
Assistant Secretary General for Media Affairs of the 
Scientific Salafi Movement, Dr. Sajed Al-Abdali defended 
their strongly worded position statement of last week 
(reftel) against US military action by saying that it is no 
different from the official Kuwaiti position. 
 
Al-Seyassah reports that Kuwaitis have opened accounts in 
the Iraqi currency in Jordanian banks. 
 
Al-Watan reports that four GCC soldiers in Kuwait as part of 
the common defense "Peninsula Shield" forces have resigned 
in accordance with a fatwa forbidding support for an 
American-led war on Iraq. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "French Justifications" 
MP Ahmad Al-Rubei wrote in independent Al-Qabas (3/15):  "It 
is very obvious that the French position is the main reason 
for Iraq's stubbornness for not complying with the 
international community demand to eliminate WMD. If France 
is against the war, then why does not it use its good 
relations with Saddam to tell him that he is the core of the 
problem?" 
 
¶4.  "Great France and the Late Adulthood" 
Adel Al-Khudari wrote in independent Al-Watan (3/16):  "I 
believe that the reason behind France's threat to use the 
veto is because France may not get the lion's share of the 
contracts for the reconstruction of Iraq.  France's attempt 
to defend the most worthless dictator on earth would damage 
its reputation because by doing so, it ignores the Iraqi 
opposition and human rights." 
 
¶5.  "Who Dares to Say?" 
Former MP Ahmad Al-Baghli wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(3/13):  "The Arab League delegation formed after the Sharm 
El-Shaikh Arab Summit is no more than a tour group. The only 
American official who met with them was Secretary of State 
Powell. [and] they met with him so they can say that they 
have done something. The same delegation stated that they 
would also visit Iraq to meet with Saddam to convince him to 
step down from power. [but] would any member of this 
delegation, namely [Arab League Secretary General] Amr 
Moussa, dare to tell Saddam to step down.?" 
 
¶6.  "Saddam's Initiative for Bush to Step Down" 
Abdelrahman Al-Ajmi wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/13): 
"Should Bush respond to Saddam Hussein's proposal and submit 
his resignation, this will not be met with satisfaction by 
the American electorate, because it is the people who elect 
their president. But, if Saddam relinquishes power, the 
Iraqis will be overjoyed." 
 
¶7.  "A Leader is Required at the White House" 
Abdelameer Al-Turkei wrote in independent Al-Seyassah 
(3/16):  "We are not advising President Bush to be a leader, 
but rather want to remind him of John Kennedy, who was able 
to eliminate the dangers of Soviet missiles in Cuba. 
President Bush can regain this leadership by giving the 
order to start the war. The moment he does that, all who 
object to his policies will retreat." 
 
¶8.  "Protests Will Not Stop the War" 
Ahmad Al-Jarallah wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/16): 
"Focusing on these [anti-war] protests results in 
obstructing the views of people who support a war against 
Iraq, and who constitute a majority among Arab decision- 
makers and Westerners. The US has pledged to establish a new 
democratic regime in Iraq by giving Iraqis the freedom to 
elect their regime and to take control over their country's 
resources. Some parts of the Arab world are arranging such 
protests on the presumption that Saddam Hussein will defeat 
the US. 
 
¶9.  "Even You, Annan" 
Salah Al-Fadhli wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (3/16): 
"Even Kofi Annan, who is America's man at the United 
Nations, stated that any military action without UN approval 
would be considered a violation of the UN convention. 
America has crossed all the red lines, and has no 
consideration for anybody. The demonstrations around the 
world may not prevent the US from starting the war, but 
America has lost many of its supporters because of the way 
it treats other nations." 
 
¶10.  "Halabja and Rumsfeld" 
Ahamd Al-Daieen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (3/16): 
"Fifteen years after the massacre at Halabja in Iraq in 
which Saddam used WMD against his own people, Secretary of 
Defense Rumsfeld is leading an unprecedented military 
campaign to topple Saddam and to disarm Iraq. Ironically, 
Rumsfeld's name is associated with the Halabja massacre. He 
was involved in providing Saddam with WMD during Iraq's war 
against Iran during the Regan Administration. Saddam Hussein 
and Ali Hassan Majeed [the Iraqi military governor of Kuwait 
during the 1990-91 occupation]. are not the only criminals." 
 
JONES