This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 001079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, MARCH 25: WAR IN IRAQ; ARAB 
LEAGUE MINISTERIAL; AL-JAZEERA COVERAGE 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Calls for boycotting and withdrawing from the 
Arab League are raised following the organization's 
communique condemning the war, with one commentator labeling 
the League as a "house of ill-repute." Another notes 
pointedly that Kuwait is the only Arab country to commit aid 
to Iraqi refugees. Al-Jazeera news channel is attacked for 
broadcasting images of American POWs: "Al-Jazeera has proven 
that they are supporters of Iraq." A Kuwaiti Shiite scholar 
calls for Shiites in Iraq to rebel against the regime. 
 
A writer urges the government to emphasize its humanitarian 
aid plans for the Iraqi people, adding that these plans have 
been deliberately minimized during months of public hedging 
and equivocation by the Kuwait leadership on the question of 
whether the country would support war with Iraq. 
 
Media reports state that schools and government offices-- 
closed over the past week--will reopen on March 29, and that 
some flights into Kuwait will be restored. Bread production 
has decreased due to falling demand after initial reports of 
shortages during the opening days of hostilities with Iraq. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  News Stories: The front page of Al-Seyassa on March 24 
carries Acting Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed's 
announcement that Kuwait will provide 45 thousand meals per 
day to "our Iraqi brethren" as part of Kuwait's humanitarian 
assistance to the Iraqi people. On March 25, Al-Watan and Al- 
Qabas report that a Kuwaiti medical aid shipment arrives in 
Umm Qasr today. 
 
Al-Qabas reports on its front page on March 25 that a 
Kuwaiti team has been the first to extinguish an Iraqi oil 
fire. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that a delegation from the Kuwait 
National Committee for the Missing and POW Affairs meet with 
coalition commanders on March 26. 
 
Al-Seyassa reports that the Secretary General of Islamic 
Shiite Scholars in Kuwait, Mohammed Al-Mahri, has called on 
Shiites in Iraq to rebel against Saddam's regime. 
 
All newspapers report Minister of Education, Dr. Musaed Al- 
Haroun's announcement that schools and universities will 
reopen next Saturday, March 29. Al-Qabas also reports that 
the Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs, Mohammad Al- 
Sharar states that government bodies will resume normal work 
on March 29. 
 
The Minister of Interior Mohammad Al-Khaled tells the 
Editors-in-Chief of local newspapers that only 15,800 
Kuwaitis have left Kuwait as opposed to 47,000 thousand 
expatriates. 
 
Al-Watan and Al-Rai Al-Aam report that the Under Secretary 
of the Ministry of Education denies rumors that teachers who 
leave Kuwait will be fired, but said that those who do not 
return when classes resume on March 29 will be breaking 
their contracts. A Ministry of Interior official source 
likewise denies reports that the Ministry will prevent the 
return of expatriates that fled Kuwait due to the war. 
 
Al-Seyassa reports on March 24 that Gulf Air has resumed its 
flights to Kuwait, and that Kuwait Airways will soon revisit 
its decision to suspend flights to Europe and the United 
States. 
 
Al-Anba front pages news that the Kuwait Stock Exchange will 
reopen on March 26. 
 
The Director of the Kuwait Bakeries Company announced that 
bread production in Kuwait has decreased from 4.5 to less 
than 2 million loaves of bread per day due to decreasing 
demand, reports Al-Watan on March 25. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "Our Contribution Must Be Effective" 
Abdelatif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas (3/24): 
"We don't know why our government is concealing its role 
while the world realizes that the campaign on Iraq was 
deployed from Kuwait. If our government is insisting on 
[this position], then we should stress our humanitarian role 
in providing medical care and food supplies and in 
supporting the reconstruction process in Iraq. We must have 
a more effective role in the liberation of Iraq by involving 
our charitable organizations and government in repaving the 
road of relations between Iraq and Kuwait." 
 
¶4.  "The Humanitarian Mission" 
Faisal Al-Qanai wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/25): 
"Kuwait is the only Arab country which has formed a 
committee to give aid to Iraqi refugees because [Kuwait] 
believes strongly in Arab principles. Whoever cares for Iraq 
and the Iraqi people must support the efforts to liberate 
Iraq." 
 
¶5.  "The War on Iraq is Not a Crusade" 
Abdelmohsen Al-Husseni wrote in independent Al-Watan (3/25): 
"The Imam of the Al-Azhar Islamic University [in Cairo] 
stated to the BBC that we cannot describe the war on Iraq a 
crusade war because. there are many Christians who object to 
this war, including the Pope himself. There is no doubt that 
his opinions are correct because it limits those who want to 
involve Islam in issues that are not of Muslims' concerns." 
 
¶6.  "House of Ill-Repute" 
Abdelamir Al-Torki wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/25): 
"The surreal Arab get-together held in Cairo yesterday 
signaled the end of the old Arab regimes. [C]ountries such 
as the GCC states, Egypt and Jordan support the 
establishment of a new Middle East while on the other hand, 
some countries have decided to side with Saddam to prevent 
the establishment of a new world system. We are certain that 
these countries will not last long after the fall of Saddam. 
The enlightened Arab countries are the ones responsible for 
the upcoming change. They can prove it by withdrawing from 
the Arab League which has been tarnished." 
 
¶7.  "Boycott the Arab League" 
Dr. Naji Al-Ziad wrote in independent Al-Qabas (3/25):  "We 
are not obligated to attend Arab League meetings to discuss 
the Iraqi crisis. if [these meetings] are to support the 
Iraqi regime. We should not. accept their cursing and 
accusations that we are traitors." 
 
¶8.  "Al-Jazeera and the Unethical Broadcast" 
Abdelrahman Al-Ajmi wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (3/25): 
"By broadcasting the pictures of the American POWs on 
television, Al-Jazeera has proven that they are supporters 
of Iraq. [B]roadcasting pictures for POWs and dead soldiers 
will not be in the interest of Al-Jazeera, especially 
because Iraq is not treating the POWs according to the 
Geneva Convention." 
 
¶9.  "To President Bush" 
Mohamamd Al-Saddiqi wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(3/25): "We congratulate you for making this historic 
decision and for sacrificing your sons in the American army 
to save the Iraqi people from a tyrannical regime and 
restore freedom in Iraq. Mr. President, your father made a 
historic decision to liberate Kuwait and now you have made 
the decision to liberate Iraq. May God bless you both." 
 
 
JONES