This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002574 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
FOR G/TIP ROBIN LERNER 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/18/2013 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TURKEY: REQUESTED ADDITIONAL TIP INFORMATION 
 
REF: A. A)ROBIN LERNER-CHRISTINA BOILER EMAIL 3/28 
     ¶B. B) ROBIN LERNER-CHRISTINA BOILER EMAIL 4/07 
 
 
 (U) Classified by Acting Political Counselor Nicholas Kass. 
Reason:1.5 (b)(d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Per reftels, additional trafficking-in-persons (TIP) 
information for Turkey is provided below. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Below are the answers to ref (A), follow up questions 
from GOT report: 
 
 
-- Para 4.  According to MFA Second Secretary Belgin Ergunes, 
the programs and activities referred to in this paragraph are 
the seminars and trainings mentioned later in the report 
(e.g., Panel on TIP hosted by the Directorate on the Problems 
and Status of Women, MOI training seminars). 
 
 
-- Para 8.  According to the Ministry of Interior (MOI), 
officials from multiple MOI departments were chosen to 
participate in a training program for educators devised by 
the Bucharest organization "Fighting Against Organized Crime" 
and the International Center for Migration Policy Development 
(ICMPD).  These trainers conducted three training seminars in 
Ankara, Istanbul, and Trabzon for a total of 75 MOI 
officials.  The seminars discussed the following issues: (1) 
methods of TIP; (2) development of new legal TIP 
regulations/implementation of these new laws; (3) assistance 
to victims; (4) identification of victims; (5) new 
developments within law enforcement regarding TIP; (6) the 
role of GOT TIP task force; and (7) improved victim 
protection. 
 
 
-- According to MFA, there is as of yet no time frame for the 
media training. 
 
 
-- Para 12.  MFA will provide as soon as possible. 
 
 
-- Para 15.  According to Turkish National Police (TNP) DG 
Mehmet Terzioglu, GOT has instructed governorates in 20 
cities to begin looking for buildings that could be renovated 
and used as shelters.  GOT has contacted IOM regarding the 
possibility of running a shelter; IOM has provided a concept 
paper to the GOT.  Terzioglu stressed that GOT was looking at 
possibilities for shelter funding.  GOT is exploring the 
possibility of using EU funds for TIP purposes, including 
shelters.  Currently, there are funds allocated within the 
GOT budget for transportation, food, and medical check-ups 
for foreigners, including TIP victims. 
 
 
-- Investigation and Prosecution.  Three specialized units of 
MOI have been targeted to receive TIP training: the law and 
order units involved in prostitution, foreigners department, 
and airport and seaport (border) units.  MOI hopes to 
continue and expand current TIP training program, but funding 
is difficult to find; the British Council funded the initial 
three training seminars in Ankara, Istanbul, and Trabzon. 
 
 
Protection and Assistance 
 
 
-- Para 23.  Some victim identification training was included 
in the MOI training.  These educators were trained by the 
organization "Fighting Against Organized Crime" and ICMPD 
(see Para 8 explanation). 
 
 
-- Para 29.  MFA will provide as soon as possible. 
 
 
-- Para 32.  According to MFA officials, the plan to assist 
victims involves: (1) the issuance of a humanitarian visa if 
appropriate; (2) rehabilitation; and (3) a health check-up. 
MFA will supply additional information as soon as possible. 
 
 
-- Para 35.  MFA will provide as soon as possible. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Below are the answers to ref (B), follow up questions 
to Ankara 1396. 
 
 
-- Para 8D.  Since August 2002, four cases have been brought 
against traffickers under Article 201.  Of these, two 
separate trials are underway in Ordu and Van provinces; 
officials are still investigating the remaining two cases. 
Additionally, 34 people have been apprehended under Article 
201 (b). 
 
 
-- Para 6D.  According to MFA and MOI officials, MOI has 
instructed governors to issue visas and residency permits to 
TIP victims. 
 
 
-- Para 6E.  This information was compiled in numerous 
interviews with GOT officials (including prosecutors, 
provincial officials, and central officials), newspaper 
articles, NGOs (including IOM and other womens groups). 
 
 
-- Para 6H.  Post has no information on anti-corruption 
efforts or any arrests/internal investigations against 
government officials involved in trafficking. 
 
 
-- Para 7C.  Trabzon Governor Adil Yazar (since replaced) 
stated that he had worked with a local NGO women's group to 
help victims of trafficking by providing education on how to 
make and sell consumables and handicrafts; the women who 
benefited from the training were those whose husbands had 
left them for "natashas."  He also told us he had worked 
closely with the Trabzon police on TIP issues, urging them to 
ensure all local police were kept well-informed of 
TIP-related developments in Ankara. 
PEARSON