This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 007298 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/06/2013 
TAGS: PGOV KISL JO
SUBJECT: ISLAMIC AFFAIRS MINISTER SHARES PLAN OF ACTION; 
DENOUNCES ATTEMPTS TO USE ISLAM FOR POLITICAL GAIN 
 
REF: A. FBIS-GMP20031101000102 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C)  During the Ambassador's courtesy call on November 5 
on Minister of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs Shaykh Ahmad 
Hilayel, the Minister outlined his priorities in the new 
cabinet, discussed efforts to challenge extremism and those 
who would use religious activities to further political 
agendas, and provided an update of the Ministry's renovation 
projects at the Holy Sites in Jerusalem.  When queried about 
provocative statements about U.S. policy in Iraq made by a 
local imam last Friday, Hilayel promised the preacher had 
spoken on politics "for the first and the last time."  He 
also offered the Ambassador his perspective on the Iraq 
situation.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
MINISTER OUTLINES PRIORITIES 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  During the Ambassador's courtesy call on Islamic 
Affairs Minister Shaykh Ahmad Hilayel, Hilayel shared his 
vision for the Ministry in the context of the King's vision 
for a reform-minded, socially-progressive government.  He 
noted that during the Aqaba retreat --  the first of its kind 
in Jordan's history -- the King emphasized the importance of 
greater transparency, openness and self-questioning to 
identify areas of weakness and to improve ministries' 
performance.  In response to the King's solicitation of 
honest criticisms of the government's performance during the 
retreat, Hilayel said he suggested that the Council of 
Ministers get away from the day-to-day issues and focus more 
on overall programs and strategic thinking to guide the 
government.  He also suggested implementing a program of 
"regular checkups" -- perhaps at 3-month or annual intervals 
-- to assess the government's performance and determine next 
steps. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Contrary to the past, the Minister says the work of 
his Ministry has earned it a position of primary importance 
within the government.  Hilayel said he strives to ensure 
every decision and project undertaken by the Ministry 
reflects Islam's respect for peace on the human level, in 
part to prevent opening the door to extremists. 
Specifically, the Ministry has instituted an awareness 
program to educate preachers through various formats, 
including interfaith dialogue, human rights education, and 
instruction on globalization and the importance of openness 
to other cultures. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
USING A "GENTLE BUT FIRM" HAND TO GUIDE THE FAITHFUL 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4.  (C)  In a likely reference to the Muslim Brotherhood and 
its political arm, the Islamic Action Front, Hilayel said the 
Ministry has taken pre-emptive steps to "close the door" to 
certain parties that sought to use religion to advance a 
political agenda.  For example, the Ministry has its own 
centers to teach the Qur'an and has increased its charitable 
activities, such as iftar banquets and distributing basic 
items to needy families.  In this way, he says, "we take the 
momentum away from the political activists who seek to use 
these activities to perpetuate their agenda." 
 
¶5.  (C)  He said that a primary goal is to ensure that 
mosques are not privately-funded and that all fall under the 
Awqaf ministry's jurisdiction.  As such, he said it is 
important to deal with the mosques "gently but firmly" to 
ensure outside extremist influences do not spread through 
Jordan's mosques. 
 
------------------------------- 
NO TOLERANCE FOR THE INTOLERANT 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  In response to the Ambassador's concerns about 
provocative statements criticizing U.S. policy in Iraq 
broadcast live by Jordan state TV from an Amman mosque last 
Friday (ref), Hilayel said the preacher, Samir al-Qubbaj, was 
not appointed by the Awqaf.  Rather, he represented the 
Supreme Judge of the Sharia court.  However, he said it was 
the first time Qubbaj had spoken on politics. "The first 
time, and the last time," he emphasized forcefully, in 
English, to make his point during a meeting otherwise 
conducted all in Arabic.  He said action will be taken 
against the imam because "we don't believe that the pulpit 
should be used to attack any people or policy."  Noting the 
common U.S. and Jordanian interest in combating religious 
politicization and extremism, he added, "what touches you, 
touches us; what upsets you, upsets us." 
 
------------------------- 
ADVICE ON IRAQI SITUATION 
------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  The discussion of Qubbaj provided an opening to 
Hilayel to offer his perspective on the Iraq situation.  He 
said he wished the U.S. military presence sent to Iraq was 
bigger, to better deal with the security situation, worrying 
that the pockets of chaos will spiral into a bigger crisis. 
Qualifying that he was never supportive of Saddam's regime, 
he mentioned a saying in Islam that "an unjust state is 
better than chaos, although there is no good in either."  He 
said Jordan cannot dispute people's "legal right" to protest 
occupation within boundaries, but it would help if the United 
States increased the visibility of the reforms and thus give 
people hope that things are indeed improving.  He also urged 
the United States to "choose the leadership carefully." 
Hilayel listened attentively as the Ambassador explained that 
the current Iraqi leadership is only a temporary arrangement 
until a fairly-elected Iraqi government can emerge, paving 
the way for a handover of U.S. authority to Iraqis.  The 
Minister agreed that a U.S. withdrawal from Iraq now would be 
disastrous. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
RESTORATION PROJECTS CONTINUE APACE IN JERUSALEM 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Hilayel says his Ministry remains actively engaged 
in various restoration projects at the Jerusalem holy sites 
in conjunction with Israeli authorities.  He noted that 
meticulous work continues to repair the southern wall of the 
Haram al-Sharif compound, and that another team is helping 
install a fire alarm system.  He said that Jordanian 
engineers are assisting in the repair of part of the wall 
that has collapsed inside the al-Aqsa mosque.  (Note: The 
Minister's overall positive description of their work on the 
Haram al-Sharif is in stark contrast to a conversation 
somewhat over a year ago when Jordanian-Israeli cooperation 
was quite strained.) 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9.  (C)  The Minister was gracious and articulate during the 
hour-long meeting with the Ambassador.  He conveyed a strong 
sense of empowerment as he discussed his Ministry's role in 
"guiding" religious life to ensure moderation prevails among 
Jordan's faithful.  Whereas some might criticize the 
Ministry's control of the mosques as contrary to the King's 
stated goal of increasing democratization -- and by extension 
freedom of speech -- the Minister openly acknowledged that 
failing to do so could open the door to extremist elements. 
While Minister Hilayel was clearly embarrassed about Qubbaj's 
sermon, his forceful reaction confirms that the statement 
does not represent Jordanian official policy and that steps 
have been taken to prevent a recurrence at Friday's 
"official" televised sermon. 
GNEHM