This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR, NEA/NGA, NP, AND PM 
STATE FOR WHA AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL PARM MOPS IZ HO
SUBJECT: HONDURAS UNILATERALLY SUPPORTS U.S. ACTION AGAINST 
IRAQ AND URGES SADDAM HUSSEIN TO LEAVE IRAQ 
 
REF: A. SAN SALVADOR 749 
 
     ¶B. USUN NEW YORK 751 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 814 
     ¶D. STATE 70678 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry Palmer; Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
¶1. (U)  President Maduro issued a statement on behalf of the 
Government of Honduras on March 18 declaring that Honduras 
supports the U.S. war on terrorism and urging the Government 
of Iraq to accept the U.S. proposal in order to avoid 
additional suffering by the Iraqi people.  The statement also 
lamented that the efforts at the UN had been fruitless in 
reaching a peaceful resolution to the situation in Iraq. 
Acting Foreign Minister Anibal Quinonez told the press that 
Honduras supported U.S. actions and urged Saddam Hussein to 
leave Iraq.  The statement also reiterated Honduras' 
commitment to finding a peaceful solution to the crisis 
 
¶2. (C) Post notes in reftel B that Honduras also was prepared 
to speak out against the Non-Aligned Movement effort to call 
for an emergency special session of the UN General Assembly. 
We also delivered reftel D demarche to the MFA. 
 
¶3. (C) Contrary to reftel A, Honduras MFA officials told the 
press that the Presidents in Roatan had decided that each 
country would issue its own communiques.  High-level GOH 
sources confirmed that President Maduro decided in the end to 
issue his own separate declaration on the situation with 
Iraq.  They stated he felt strongly about Honduras expressing 
its own clear support for U.S. action against Iraq.  The 
comments by Salvadoran FM de Avila reported in reftel B that 
Honduras joined in the Central American declaration appear to 
be in error. 
 
¶4. (U) Begin informal Embassy translation: 
 
Press Communique 
 
In light of the recent developments and tense urgent 
international situation, The Government of Honduras seeks to 
inform the nation and international community of its points 
of view in the following way: 
 
      ¶1.    It laments the demonstrated efforts at the UN 
body to reach a peaceful solution to a conflict in Iraq has 
proved fruitless. 
 
      ¶2.    It supports the Government of the United States 
of America's war against terrorism and calls on the 
Government of Iraq, in order to avoid further suffering by 
the Iraqi people, to accept the demands proposed by the 
United States of America. 
 
      ¶3.    It considers it essential to revitalize the 
mechanisms and urgent requests that have made it possible for 
the majority of democratic countries to act together for the 
preservation of world peace. 
 
      ¶4.    It reiterates its pacifist convictions and in 
this sense believes that all possible efforts should be 
taken, no matter how remote the possibility of success, in 
order to avoid war. 
 
      ¶5.    The Government of Honduras confirms its decisions 
to continue participating in all international fora to help 
build world peace and social justice for all. 
 
Tegucigalpa, March 18, 2003. 
 
End informal Embassy translation 
Palmer