This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T DJIBOUTI 001836 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/AF, DS/ITA 
ADDIS ABABA FOR RSO 
ASMARA FOR RSO 
NAIROBI FOR RSO 
CJTF HOA FOR J2X 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: EXEMPT 1.6X1 
TAGS: PTER ASEC CASC PREL DJ
SUBJECT: THREAT INFORMATION 
 
 
Classified By: RSO MARC RAMOS FOR REASON 1.5(C) 
 
¶1. (S) On 4 October 2003 about 1400 hours, the Embassy 
received threat information indicating that a Protestant 
church in the down town area of Djibouti was targeted for a 
bomb attack on that same evening.  Notifications were 
immediately made to all appropriate authorities and the 
Embassy issued a warden notice to the community identifying 
the potential threat. 
 
¶2.  (S) On 4 October 2003 about 1400 hours, Major Patrick 
Anderson, Embassy US Liaison Officer, received threat 
information from an American citizen stating that the 
Protestant church located in the downtown area of Djibouti 
was to be targeted for a terrorist attack.  The American 
citizen was approached by a Djiboutian national who is known 
to attend religious services at the church.  The Djiboutian 
national, only known as Kadir, stated that he had been 
approached by two men, only known as Guelleh and A'amadi, to 
place a bomb in the church on the evening of 4 October 2003 
during the religious service.  Kadir, states that he 
immediately refused to carry out their requests.  No other 
information was given or sought.  The American citizen 
immediately notified the church's French Pastor who in turn 
notified church members. 
 
¶3.  (S) Upon notification of the threat, the Charge' 
d'Affaires (CDA) directed the USLO to gather more information 
from the source.  An interview was scheduled with Kadir on 5 
October 2003 between the hours of 0900 and 0930, but Kadir 
never showed up at the Embassy.  COS notified Host Nation 
security Services and is working closely with them to follow 
up on the alleged threat.  CDA drafted a warden notice and 
conferred with the Department on the issuance and language of 
the notice prior to release.  RSO returned from leave on the 
morning of 5 October 2003 and was notified upon arrival to 
his residence. 
 
¶4. (S) The information received is inconclusive, non-credible 
and sketchy at best.  RSO and COS will continue to work 
closely with Host Nation counterparts to follow any 
developments, but both officers believe that the validity of 
the source's information, as relayed to the American citizen, 
is highly improbable.  Without further details from the 
source the information should only be considered as hearsay 
from a third party.  RSO will notify the Department 
immediately if any leads are developed. 
 
5 (U) POC is RSO Marc Ramos at 253-35-39-95 ext. 2307. 
SMITH