This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 COLOMBO 001982 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR D, SA, SA/INS, EUR/NB, INR/NESA 
NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  11-17-13 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS PTER PINR CE NO
SUBJECT:  Possible ways forward in political standoff 
between Sri Lankan President and Prime Minister 
 
Refs:  (A) Colombo 1974 
-      (B) Colombo 1971, and previous 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Jeffrey J. Lunstead. 
Reasons 1.5 (b, d). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  President Kumaratunga and Prime 
Minister Wickremesinghe continue to consult to find a 
workable solution to the current political struggle. 
The PM has remained focused on the peace process 
throughout the crisis.  Reaction from international as 
well as domestic parties has been focused on possible 
repercussions for the peace process.  Several options 
remain available to resolve the imbroglio, and attention 
is now focused on which will play out.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
President remains steadfast on Defense Ministry 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶2.  (C) As previously reported, following her November 4 
takeover of three key ministries and prorogation of 
Parliament, President Kumaratunga has publicly called 
for a national government of reconciliation, invited the 
PM for talks, and met with Norwegian peace facilitators. 
Throughout these past two weeks, the President has 
repeatedly stated that she supports the peace process 
and ceasefire accord.  However, the President has 
remained steadfast that she retain the Defense Ministry, 
a key component in the peace process.  While the initial 
round of talks with the PM did not break the impasse 
between the two, there are some signs that a workable 
compromise might be possible.  The President and Prime 
Minister will meet again on November 18. 
 
--------------------------- 
PM focused on peace process 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C) Prime Minister Wickremesinghe, for his part, 
has remained focused on the peace process throughout his 
efforts to bring resolution to the current political 
crisis.  Avoiding direct criticism of the President, the 
PM has worked to provide leadership to his United 
National Front (UNF) party, to temper UNF hardliners 
advocating retaliation against the President, and to 
appeal to the international community for support.  He 
has let key party politicians, such as peace process 
negotiator G.L. Peiris and chief whip Mahinda 
Samarasinghe, garner domestic support and argue the 
GSL's position in the public arena.  He maintains that, 
without control of the defense portfolio, he can not be 
in charge of the peace process, and thus has offered the 
President this responsibility.  While the Prime Minister 
publicly says he is willing to work with the President, 
privately he is skeptical of such cohabitational 
success. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Concern over President's actions 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Reaction to the President's November 4-5 actions 
has centered mainly on the possible effect on the peace 
process.  (Septel addresses the economic ramifications.) 
Support for the PM has been especially strong, with 130 
MPs signing a letter expressing their full confidence, 
and thousands of supporters rallying in support upon his 
return.  While several political parties have expressed 
admiration and support for the President, she has also 
come under criticism -- by segments of the Buddhist 
clergy, for example -- for causing complications in the 
peace process at an extremely crucial time.  Members of 
the international community, including the U.S., UK, EU, 
India and Japan have issued statements and/or publicly 
expressed concern over the situation, stressing the need 
for the peace process to continue.  Tamil political 
parties and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) 
have also voiced their concern over the effects that the 
President-PM wrangling might have on the peace process, 
but all in all, the Tigers seem to be appraising the 
situation in the south judiciously. 
------------------------ 
Effects on Peace Process 
------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (C) Even with the Defense Ministry now under the 
President, there has been no short-term impact to the 
peace process vis-a-vis the military and the ceasefire. 
The Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission (SLMM) continues to 
report a high degree of cooperation with the military, 
and statements made by defense officials (see Ref B) 
indicate that the military will continue to act with 
prudence while civilians sort out the political 
situation.  Both the President and the Tigers have 
stressed the importance of the ceasefire continuing. 
At a November 14 press conference, however, Norwegian 
Deputy Foreign Minister Vidar Helgesen emphasized the 
need for clarity in the south in order for real progress 
in the peace track, and stated that until such clarity 
existed, there was no space to assist the GSL and the 
Tigers in peace negotiations.  Helgesen has made clear 
he believes the ceasefire could come undone if the 
situation drags on unresolved too long. 
 
------------------ 
Ways to Go Forward 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  (C) As the Prime Minister and President propose ways 
to create a workable solution to the events of the past 
two weeks, there is much speculation regarding the 
ultimate way forward.  Depending on the current mood of 
the President or PM, several options appear likely. 
They include: 
 
-- Returning the Ministries:  In this scenario, the 
President would return control to the government of the 
defense, interior and mass communications ministries. 
The government would presumably provide some face-saving 
method for the President to do so.  While this would 
restore the GSL's control of the peace process, the 
situation would not resolve the President's cohabitation 
disagreements that precipitated her November 4 actions. 
There is talk she might give back Interior and Mass 
Communication but keep Defense and/or that a Defense 
Secretary palatable to both the PM and the President 
 
SIPDIS 
might be appointed. 
 
-- Cohabitational Committee:  According to the PM's 
idea, a committee comprising representation by the GSL 
and the Opposition would advise the government on the 
peace process.  This would formalize an arrangement for 
the President to provide her input on the GSL's peace 
process decisions and possibly address her contention 
(which has some merit) that the PM does not "consult" 
with her regarding negotiations with the Tigers.  This 
is also sometimes referred to as a "council of 
concilitation." 
 
-- Elections:  From the President's perspective, her 
hope in calling elections would be for her People's 
Alliance (PA) party to increase its number of seats, 
and, in coalition with other parties, regain the 
majority in Parliament.  This would put the President in 
control of the peace process.  The PM believes that 
parliamentary elections would result in more seats for 
his UNF coalition, serving to strengthen his mandate to 
lead the peace process.  Even if the UNF were to 
increase its majority, a resolution to the current 
crisis could still be elusive:  the government would 
still have to cohabitate with the President, who remains 
in her position regardless of the electoral outcome. 
Moreover, there is a palpable sense of dread at the 
prospect of elections which historically are violent and 
corrupt. 
 
-- Standoff:  If neither the PM or President agree on 
the ministerial or committee option and elections are 
not called, it is possible that the current standoff 
could continue.  The government would continue its 
business, with Parliament meeting to work on the budget. 
Negotiations with the LTTE, however, would likely remain 
on hold with neither the PM or President in clear 
control of the peace process.  As noted above, this 
poses a danger to the peace process. 
 
¶7.  (C) COMMENT:  Mission's position so far has been to 
emphasize to all parties the need for the peace process 
to be supported, while not becoming embroiled in the 
internecine political struggle between the President and 
PM.  The first test of the changed political landscape 
and a marker of the PM's and President's willingness to 
resolve this comes on Wednesday, November 19 when 
Parliament is set to reconvene and the GSL presents the 
budget after the two week prorogation.  While fresh 
elections are possible, they would likely be expensive 
and violent, and result in a situation not that much 
different from the current stalemate.  Mature 
cooperation between the PM and President to take the 
peace process forward would be the best possible 
outcome, but the two have a long history of rivalry, 
which they would have to put behind them.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶8.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD