This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 001821 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/09/2013 
TAGS: ASEC OVIP PGOV PREL TU
SUBJECT: U/S GROSSMAN'S 12/9/03 MEETING WITH ISTANBUL 
GOVERNOR GULER 
 
 
Classified By: Consul General David L. Arnett for reasons 1.4 (b) and ( 
 
 
d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: U/S Grossman met with the Governor of 
Istanbul to express U.S. solidarity with the people of 
Istanbul and Turkey, and our ongoing cooperation in the war 
on terror.  Guler outlined a series of "lessons learned" from 
the attacks, and expressed optimism that Turkey would be 
better prepared in the future to interdict larger-scale 
attacks.  Guler expressed thanks for USG support against 
terrorism in the past, and some frustration at European 
attitudes regarding threats to Turkey.  U/S Grossman thanked 
Guler for excellent cooperation in the war on terror, 
including assistance in safeguarding USG personnel here in 
Istanbul.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2. (U) U/S Grossman met December 9 with Istanbul Governor 
Muamer Guler.  Guler, a career civil servant in the Ministry 
of the Interior, oversees the security apparatus for the 
Istanbul province, and directly oversees GoT measures in 
response to the four bombings which took place in Istanbul in 
November. 
 
 
"Not quite ready" for attacks 
----------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Guler was candid in his observation that Istanbul was 
not fully prepared for coordinated attacks like those which 
took place in November.  Guler said that, in the past, 
Istanbul had seen its share of smaller-scale terrorist 
attacks, such as those carried out by PKK/KADEK, DHKP-C, and 
others.  He said that Turkey has now realized the need to 
prepare for larger, coordinated attacks. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Guler thanked the U.S. for its consistent support of 
Turkey in the context of the war on terror.  Guler said 
Turkey looks for such support from our European allies as 
well, and hopes that all governments see such attacks as 
attacks against civilization and humanity, not just Istanbul 
and Turkey.  U/S Grossman said that the USG, from President 
Bush and Secretary Powell to Amb. Edelman and CG Arnett, have 
conveyed our sense of solidarity with the people of Turkey. 
U/S Grossman said he went to the sites of the attacks, Neve 
Shalom Synagogue and the British Consulate General, to 
personally express his solidarity, and was impressed by the 
spirit of the people of Istanbul, who are already rebuilding. 
 
 
EU surprisingly alarmist 
------------------------ 
 
 
¶5. (C) Guler noted that, while U.S. support for Turkey has 
been strong in the wake of the attacks, "our European friends 
have been unexpectedly worried."  He said that 25 percent of 
tourists coming to Turkey visit Istanbul, and recent EU 
statements saying that Turkey and Istanbul are not safe hurt 
Turkey, which is what the terrorists want.  U/S Grossman 
noted that in the past the USG has tried to focus the 
attention of our European allies on terrorist groups which 
attack Turkey.  He said it is unfortunate that the EU often 
takes too long to see these groups as terrorists.  U/S 
Grossman noted, however, that we will continue to work with 
the EU and others to keep them focused on these groups, 
closing their offices and cutting off their finances.  U/S 
Grossman highlighted the upcoming NATO Summit in Istanbul as 
a major opportunity for Turkey to show the EU and others its 
progress in democracy, economic, and social development over 
the last 20-25 years. 
 
 
Attackers' Profile and Whereabouts 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Guler addressed the issue of cooperation with Syria in 
pursuing suspected bombers.  He said that it now appears that 
Azad Ekinci planned the attacks, and that he had escaped to 
Syria.  Syria quickly responded to the attacks by arresting 
20 people and immediately turning them over to Turkey.  After 
interrogation by GoT officials, it became clear than most of 
these people had little to nothing to do with the attacks 
(most of whom were school children), and only one was finally 
arrested.  Guler said Turkey knows for the most part who the 
assailants are, and believes 4-5 people are still at large, 
and probably entered Syria at the time of or soon after the 
attacks.  Guler added that he believes Syria is "trying to be 
as helpful as possible within the framework of the Adana 
Agreement between Turkey and Syria." 
 
 
¶7. (C) When asked about the possibility of any links that 
these terrorists may have with Iran, Guler replied that 
"Turkey has no problems with Iran.  One key figure, Yusuf 
Polat, was caught by Iranians at the border."  Guler said 
that "it is quite clear that a group of friends came together 
in Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Syria.  But, the button for 
this attack was pushed by al-Qaida."  Guler described the 
group as a "platform," which was organized and trained 
abroad, but which hosted others who came from outside and 
carried out the attacks.  He noted that this "platform" type 
of organization made detection difficult. 
 
 
Cooperation in war on terror 
---------------------------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) U/S Grossman also expressed thanks on behalf of the 
USG for the assistance and protection that U.S. military and 
diplomatic personnel have received in Istanbul.  "We 
appreciate your efforts to keep us safe," he said.  "We 
remain ready to cooperate with you in an effort to stop these 
terrorists." 
 
 
¶9. (U) U/S Grossman cleared on this cable. 
ARNETT