This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DHS FOR DAVID TEACH 
BRUSSELS FOR TSA REPS KNUDSEN AND CELLAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON NL
SUBJECT: AVIATION SECURITY:  DUTCH CONCERNS ABOUT NEW U.S. 
CARGO INSPECTION RULES 
 
REF: NOVEMBER 2003 TSA AVIATION SECURITY DIRECTIVES 
 
¶1.     (SBU) Summary.  Dutch aviation security officials and 
national carrier KLM recently voiced their shared concern 
that new U.S. requirements for inspections of incoming cargo 
(a.k.a. the 10% rule) will be difficult for carriers to meet. 
 The Dutch contend that their inspection procedures are 
sufficient.  The GONL plans to conduct its own risk 
assessment, for which U.S. Customs has offered to lend 
expertise.  The GONL reiterates its commitment to aviation 
security, and enjoys regular consultations on matters of 
mutual interest with TSA/Department of Homeland Security. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.     (SBU)  On November 18, EconOff and U.S. Customs 
liaison Bryan Evans (who is based in Rotterdam) met with 
Harry Mayer, Head of Legal Affairs, and director for aviation 
security policy at the Ministry of Justice.  The meeting was 
the latest in a series of periodic consultations between post 
and Dutch aviation security officials.  Mayer affirmed his 
support for strong transatlantic cooperation in aviation 
security, but highlighted several emerging concerns that the 
Dutch have on aspects of U.S. air security requirements.  In 
general, the Dutch feel deluged by what they see is an 
excessive number of security directives from the USG.  The 
Dutch mantra on aviation security directives is that American 
requirements appear haphazard; instead, requirements should 
be more closely linked to risks.  (Note:  this sentiment has 
been a repeating theme in our consultations with Dutch 
authorities.  End Note.)  Mayer had just returned from 
Washington where he met with DHS/TSA Director of 
International Affairs David Tiedge.  Mayer spoke very highly 
of his reception at TSA and mentioned that he and Tiedge 
discussed a number of topics of mutual interest including the 
USG's new "continued search" requirements on passenger 
baggage, which the Dutch find rather redundant and 
burdensome.  (Note:  TSA informs post that its reps are 
working with the Dutch to streamline the process.  On 
November 17 per the new security requirement, TSA offered 
Schiphol Airport options to minimize the number of tables for 
passenger check-in services.  End Note.)  Mayer offered 
Tiedge a preview of Amsterdam Schiphol Airport's new risk 
analysis (a.k.a. profiling) policy, which is still in the 
development phase.  Mayer noted that he looks forward to 
following up with DHS on these two items of interest. 
 
¶3.     (SBU) EconOff raised the issue of new threats to cargo 
aviation, as have been identified in recent TSA bulletins, 
and the accompanying new requirements that cargo carriers 
perform 10% random screening.  The Dutch are "very focused" 
on this issue, but question whether the increased risk 
warrants the 10% inspection measure.  Mayer said the new 
requirement creates a significant burden for carriers and 
says that it will take some time for them to meet the 
requirement in full.  The Ministry of Justice is working 
jointly with Dutch Customs and the Royal Marechaussee to 
develop a risk assessment for cargo passing through Schiphol 
Airport.  U.S. Customs Liaison Evans volunteered to tap 
sources of DHS expertise for any future the risk assessment, 
and Mayer welcomed the suggestion.  Mayer noted that TSA's 
2003 certification of Schiphol Airport did not identify any 
major soft spots in the area of security. 
 
¶4.     (SBU) EconOff also discussed cargo security with Mr. 
Teun Platenkamp of national carrier KLM's government affairs 
office.  Platenkamp echoed the Ministry's complaints about 
the 10% requirement, adding, "It's impossible to open 10% of 
cargo."  KLM and other cargo carriers at Schiphol employ the 
"known shipper" system to the greatest extent possible, and 
do what they can to ensure a secure supply chain, including 
the use of sophisticated seals and GPS-based tracking 
systems.  KLM x-rays any cargo that does not come from a 
"known shipper."  In addition, the Dutch national carrier has 
a trace detection system available that looks for explosives. 
 Platenkamp suggested that it would be more effective to 
apply enhanced security requirements to cargo agents, rather 
than carriers.  If the USG recognized the GONL's national 
cargo security requirements for regulated agents, this would 
greatly reduce the burden on air carriers transporting cargo 
to the U.S.  Agents, he says, are more vulnerable than 
carriers.  America's new cargo security requirements were 
among the more popular topics of conversation at the recent 
European civil aviation meeting in Athens, he noted.  KLM is 
drafting a letter outlining its procedures which it will 
present to TSA officials in response to the cargo requirement. 
RUSSEL