This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 002468 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ECA/PE/C/CU; NEA/PPD (CBOURGEOIS, DMACINNES, 
JGAFFNEY); NEA/ARN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP OEXC SCUL JO
SUBJECT: Request for Two American Cultural Specialists - FY 
2003 
 
¶1. Summary:  The Amman Public Affairs section requests two 
ACULSPECS, Ms. Lynne Allen and her husband Mr. Sergei 
Tsvetkov for July/August 2003. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
A.) Ms. Lynne Allen, Professor of Art and Director of 
Rutgers Center for Innovative Print and Paper, Department of 
Visual Arts, Mason Gross School of the Arts - Rutgers in 
July 2003.  Ms. Allen, in cooperation with the National 
Gallery of Fine Arts, conducted an extremely successful two- 
week etching workshop in July 2001.  This time around, Ms. 
Allen will be undertaking a lithography technique, a ground- 
breaking art form for Jordanian students and artists. 
 
B.) Mr. Sergei Tsvetkov, a master printmaker.  Mr. Tsvetkov 
will conduct a series of workshops with the University of 
Jordan's College of Fine Arts and artists at the National 
Gallery for Fine Arts. 
 
¶2.   Description of activity: PAS was approached by HRH 
Princess Wijdan Ali, President of The National Gallery of 
Fine Arts and Dean of the College of Fine Arts at the 
University of Jordan, to host Ms. Allen again for a 
lithography workshop in Amman and Mr. Tsvetkov for an 
advanced etching workshop for artists and students. 
 
¶3.   Dates and duration for each program is as follows: 
 
A.) Ms. Allen: July 13 through August 5, FY 2003 Fourth 
Quarter. 
 
B.) Mr. Tsvetkov: July 3 through July 24, FY 2003 Fourth 
Quarter. 
 
¶4.   Justification: 
 
A.) Ms. Allen's work in Jordan will be an opportunity to 
introduce artists to new artistic expression and to inspire 
them to adopt new techniques in their artwork.  She will 
convey a clear understanding of American artwork to local 
artists and students and press them to adopt new styles and 
introduce them to a whole new printmaking technique. 
 
B.) Mr. Tsvetkov who is a master printmaker will put to use 
Jordan's first lithography press courtesy of Rutgers 
University, the donation of which Ms. Allen is responsible 
for.  His program will be an opportunity to expose Jordanian 
art students, artists, art educators and museum staff to new 
artistic methods and expertise.  His work at the National 
gallery will be a continuation of its artists' primary 
introduction to etching. 
 
¶5. This program supports the MPP goals of "Promoting mutual 
understanding" and enhancing appreciation of "US society and 
culture" by introducing Jordanian artists and students to 
new and different artistic techniques. 
 
¶6. Cost sharing: The University of Jordan will provide Ms. 
Allen's and Mr. Tsvetkov's accommodation and as well as 
their in-town transportation. 
 
¶7. The Control Officer for these programs is CAO Donna 
Winton, Tel: 962-6-5920101, Ext. 2115, Fax: 962-6-592-0121. 
Please Advise.  GNEHM