This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005645 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/04/2013 
TAGS: MARR MOPS PREL TU IZ
SUBJECT: CHOD OZKOK EMPHASIZES KURDISH ISSUES AS KEY TO 
TURKISH DECISION ON STABILIZATION FORCE 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador Eric Edelman.  Reasons 1.5 B and 
¶D. 
 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  During the AMB's 9/5 introductory call on 
GEN Ozkok, the CHOD focused on ethnic tension in nIZ and its 
effect on Turkish public opinion, and thus on Turkey's 
ability to contribute troops to the stabilization force.  US 
action on PKK/KADEK is also a key factor in Turkey's 
decision, and thus Ozkok looked forward to the initial 
State-led team due in Ankara the following week.  End 
summary. 
 
 
¶2. (C) TGS Chief GEN Hilmi Ozkok was relaxed and friendly 
during the Ambassador's 9/5 introductory call.  Prior to 
consulting his notes, Ozkok made complimentary remarks about 
Commander CENTCOM GEN Abizaid.  He also asked about the 
pending UNSCR, to which the AMB noted these were early days 
in the process. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Apologizing for the formality, Ozkok then read from 
notes making the following points: 
 
 
BILATERAL RELATIONS:  They have been long, close and warm. 
They are more important today than ever.  He then listed what 
he called Turkey's extensive contributions to Operation Iraqi 
Freedom, including pre-war (ONW) and post-war (GLOC). 
 
 
HLDG:  While the 18th HLDG scheduled for May had been 
postponed, new D/CHOD GEN Ilker Basbug will co-chair the 
anticipated November meeting in the US with the intention of 
helping develop momentum in the bilateral security 
relationship. 
 
 
NATO:  SACEUR GEN Jones' recent visit was very constructive. 
Focus was on the new command structure.  Turkey is ready to 
host the Air Component Command (AIRSOUTH) and is the lead 
NATO nation for the NATO Response Force's land component. 
 
 
IRAQ:  Ethnic tensions in northern Iraq cause security 
problems for Turkey.  Turkey approaches Iraq as a whole, with 
no ethnic discrimination.  No ethnic group should be allowed 
to use force for its own ends.  Kirkuk and Mosul belong to no 
local groups.  The recent clashes in Tuzkhurmatu demonstrate 
that the PUK is a troublemaker.  They are "as negative as 
Saddam vis-a-vis the Turkmen."  The Kurdish raid on the 
Kirkuk deeds office during the war was another example of 
ethnic-driven policy.  The US should be even-handed and raise 
these issues with the PUK.  The AMB later in the meeting 
noted that our bilateral ties are much broader than the 
Iraq-centric current focus and that democratic allies who 
differ could solve differences privately though honest and 
direct talk.  Ozkok agreed and said that such honest and 
frank talk had kept the July 4 Suleymania event from having a 
greater negative impact on relations.  AMB agreed that 
intercommunal violence is dangerous for our nation-building 
efforts.  He was relieved that quick intervention by US 
forces had help calm the Tuzkhurmatu situation and noted that 
US forces had detained Kurdish police who had opened fire. 
Communication between US and Turkish forces appears to be 
better, and the Embassy's Army Attache has gone to Silopi 
today (9/5) to liaise with the Turkish Special Forces Command 
there.  AMB told Ozkok Turkish concerns had been passed to 
Washington and Baghdad. 
 
 
TURKMEN:  Ozkok said he was disappointed that the only 
Turkmen cabinet slot was the "insignificant" Science and 
Technology ministry.  AMB noted that the US had already been 
criticized for making too many decisions based on ethnic 
balance, which could undermine the overall goal of a unified 
Iraq.  Two Turkmen had been picked for the important 
Constitutional Commission.  Ozkok agreed, but said ethnic 
balance was important in these early stages.  While Turkey 
also had a "kinship" with the Iraqi Kurds, the Turkmen are 
more in need of Turkey's protection.  The Turkish public is 
sensitive to this issue.  As above, AMB said that Washington 
and Baghdad had been informed of Turkey's views. 
 
 
TURKEY IN STABILIZATION FORCE:  Ethnic tensions in nIZ 
(Tuzkhurmatu being the worst recent example) have a 
side-effect on Turkey's ability to contribute troops. 
Kurdish statements opposing Turkish participation affect 
Turkish public opinion.  Claims that Turkey instigates such 
clashes to create a raison d'etre for military intervention 
are false.  Turkey cannot be indifferent to the future of 
Iraq, but the final decision on troop contributions belong to 
the government and parliament.  The military will give them 
the best info they can. 
MIL-MIL TALKS:  Ozkok was happy with the 9/4 discussions. 
Both the TGS and CENTCOM are working on the details of a 
Turkish Area of Responsibility (AOR) in the Anbar region as 
well as alternate AORs.  Turkey's logistical capabilities are 
an important factor. 
 
 
PKK/KADEK:  The terrorist organization is a destabilizing 
force in nIZ.  It uses the area for training and staging. 
Turkey has taken "diplomatic actions" such as the 
Reintegration (Amnesty) Law to deal with the problem, and 
Turkey looks forward to cooperating with the US on this.  The 
PKK/KADEK uses different names in different areas, and the US 
should be careful not to talk to them in any guise.  The 
State Department-led team GEN Jones had said would come the 
following week will be a very important visit.  AMB 
re-confirmed the President's commitment not to allow Iraq to 
be a haven for terrorists.  AMB also said he hoped next 
week's State-led team would be followed by other teams, which 
could discuss the reintegration law, info ops, Turkish 
refugees in Iraq (Makhmour) and other strategy elements on 
which we could cooperate.  GEN Abizaid has his hands full at 
the moment, but the internationalization of the coalition 
should help free-up US forces to deal with the PKK/KADEK. 
Ozkok said he understood why anti-PKK/KADEK ops had moved 
slowly, but now they must move more quickly. 
 
 
BORDER DIFFICULTIES:  When AMB pointed out slow-downs in fuel 
shipments to the 101st AB in nIZ, Ozkok admitted that Turkish 
border operations were too slow.  The Habur Gate has a 
limited capacity.  Night operations are hampered not only by 
lack of lighting, but by personnel shortages.  The various 
GOT agencies need to send more people so Turkey can process 
vehicles 24/7, which is not currently the case. 
 
 
NOTE:  Army Attache (now in Silopi as mentioned above) told 
us afternoon 9/5 that in fact the Habur Gate is operating 
24/7, although the Turks there told him that manning was 
reduced at night.  Army Attache personally observed the gate 
operating between 0200-0400 that morning.  End note. 
EDELMAN