This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 004679 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR DR
SUBJECT: PRESIDENT OF DOMINICAN LEGISLATIVE CHAMBER ALFREDO 
PACHECO OUTLINES AGENDA 
 
REF: SANTO DOMINGO 4249 
 
SUMMARY 
 
¶1. (SBU) On August 27 newly elected activist Chamber of 
Deputies President Alfredo Pacheco told Charge d,Affaires 
and Poloffs he sets a priority on reforming the Penal and 
Civil Codes. He emphasized ongoing collaboration with new 
Senate President Jesus Vasquez to develop a joint legislative 
agenda to be formally announced soon.  He expects Congressman 
Ramon Radhames Garcia to renounce parliamentary immunity in 
connection with trafficking charges but is unclear on next 
steps if Garcia does not act.  The Chamber,s new session 
officially began August 19 (three days behind schedule) after 
a disorderly effort by rival Rafaela &Lila8 Alburquerque 
and her supporters to prevent Pacheco from assuming 
leadership (reftel).  Pacheco has now taken the helm of what 
is probably the stronger house of the National Congress and 
is setting his own course.  A coalition-builder, Pacheco 
strongly supports modernizing and institutionalizing the 
Congress.  END SUMMARY. 
 
NEW LEADERSHIP MEET AND GREET 
 
¶2. (SBU) On August 27 new Chamber of Deputies President 
Alfredo Pacheco discussed legislative priorities with Charge 
d,Affaires and Poloffs.  He was accompanied by the other 
principal officers of the house Vice-President Manuel Sanchez 
(PRD); Committee on Foreign Relations President Cristian 
Paredes; Ilana Neumann, Deputy representing Puerto Plata 
(PRD); and Nemencia de la Cruz, Deputy representing Santo 
Domingo (PRD).  Pacheco began by expressing his support for 
female politicians (there are 24 women among 150 deputies) 
and the potential influence Charge could have in promoting 
more female participation in government.  He said that 
although the Chamber,s leadership team is PRD, their views 
differ concerning presidential candidates.  Pacheco also 
acknowledged opponent Lila Alburquerque,s instrumental role 
in promoting respect for female politicians.  He credited her 
for pushing for key legislation that protects women,s 
rights, such as the recently passed law against trafficking 
in persons. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Pacheco told Charge that he and Senate President 
Vasquez have consulted and will continue to develop a joint 
legislative agenda.  He mentioned as probable priorities 
reform of Civil and Penal Codes, legislation to 
&regularize8 rent prices and protect property owners, and 
follow-up on a law that would institutionalize a human rights 
ombudsman (Defensor del Pueblo).  Pacheco is keen on free 
trade and globalization.  He strongly supports a free trade 
agreement and concurred with Charge,s idea that future 
congressional delegations include meetings at the Chamber. 
 
WHAT ABOUT RADHAMES GARCIA? 
 
¶4. (SBU) When asked about his public urging that accused 
alien smuggler Ramon Radhames Garcia renounce his 
parliamentary immunity, Pacheco told the Charge that the 
Chamber has not yet received any written communication from 
Garcia.  He commented that the Dominican constitution is 
vague about the procedures for revoking immunity of an 
accused public official but said he would act following 
receipt of Garcia,s written statement.  Pacheco reiterated 
that ultimately the judiciary has to decide Garcia,s guilt 
or innocence.  He said that public officials )- like other 
persons -- are not above the law and should be prosecuted for 
criminal offenses.  The Charge stressed that the U.S. view 
that the Dominican government has been weak on punishing its 
own and that failure to prosecute corrupt officials could 
adversely affect our bilateral relationship. 
 
COMMENT 
 
¶5. (SBU) Pacheco comes across as an impressively thoughtful 
and articulate politician.  It is too early to tell whether 
he can deliver on legislation, but he is off to a fast start. 
 He has already begun cleaning house, closing down several 
departments within the Chamber of Deputies which he deemed 
unnecessary.  As many as 300 low-level political appointees 
will lose their jobs as a result of the sweep, and will 
likely be replaced by Pacheco,s own supporters. 
 
¶6. (SBU) As for the hard-fought campaign to win the Chamber 
presidency, it remains unclear whether Pacheco was involved 
in orchestrating the blackout and noisy demonstrations on 
August 16 (his supporters showed up for the session with 
flashlights).  Embassy will continue developing relations 
with Pacheco and covering significant developments regarding 
alleged alien smuggler Radhames Garcia. 
 
BIO NOTE 
 
¶7. (SBU) A well-established PRD leader in the Congress, 
Alfredo Pacheco has a strong political base in his home 
neighborhood Cristo Rey (a poor barrio in Santo Domingo). 
From a very young age Pacheco got involved in politics 
through community service with the Catholic Church and as a 
volunteer political activist.  He is well liked by his 
Congressional colleagues and by the general public.  Most 
Dominicans, weary of his predecessor,s four-year reign as 
speaker, seem willing to give him a fair chance to usher in 
legislative change. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Pacheco is a long-time public servant who has worked 
his way up through the ranks.  At age 44, he has 13 years in 
the Chamber along with prior experience as a city councilman, 
local-level PRD spokesman, and PRD Chamber spokesman.  He has 
already published a booklet about the House of 
Representatives, with a brief summary of major constitutional 
reforms, an explanation of the composition of the House, a 
directory of representatives with personal addresses and 
birth dates, and a list of proposed legislative 2003-04 
agenda items. 
KUBISKE