This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002539 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/ARN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2013 
TAGS: PGOV ELAB JO ILAB
SUBJECT: LABOR SUPPORTING PARLIAMENTARY CANDIDATE; UNION 
LEADER OPTIMISTIC ON POST-SADDAM WORLD AND COOPERATION WITH 
THE PALACE. 
 
REF: AMMAN 3761 (2002) 
 
Classified By: CDA GREGORY L. BERRY.  REASONS: 15. (B) and (D) 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY.  Fathallah Omrani, Vice President of the 
Jordanian International Textile Workers Union, told us April 
29 he is optimistic a parliamentary candidate in Irbid 
endorsed by the textile union would be elected.  He was also 
pleased to report increased contact with the Palace on 
QIZ/labor issues.  Finally, Omrani noted that QIZ investors 
are "much more relaxed" following the fall of Saddam's 
regime, and reported hints that QIZ investment here may 
benefit from the SARS epidemic in Asia.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
GETTING ORGANIZED: LABOR 
BACKS PARLIAMENTARY CANDIDATE 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C)  On April 29, PolOff met with Fathallah Omrani. 
Omrani was upbeat, and was happy to report that union-backed 
Gibreel Abu Rahman, director of a large QIZ textile plant 
near Irbid, was off to a strong start with his parliamentary 
election campaign.  Last week, Omrani organized a meeting of 
120 QIZ workers, where he stressed the need for the workers 
and their families to vote, and to vote for Abu Rahman. 
Omrani told the workers that having a parliamentarian who was 
elected "by the laborers" is crucial.  He estimates that 
there are over 2,500 votes in the Irbid QIZ factories. 
 
¶3. (C) Omrani said he understands that many are going to vote 
for their own tribe's candidate, but expects the majority of 
laborers in the district to go with Abu Rahman.  Omrani told 
PolOff that many QIZ workers, male and female, have 
volunteered to work for Abu Rahman's campaign. "Abu Rahman is 
very, very popular.  He is the labor candidate.  People know 
that the union, and the new QIZ jobs, have allowed people to 
take care of themselves and their families."  He noted that 
thousands of people have access to basic health care through 
the union's cooperative health clinic that Omrani organized 
with QIZ plant mangers and factory owners (reftel). 
 
--------------------------- 
ROYAL PALACE IS 'LISTENING' 
TO LABOR CONCERNS 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C)  Omrani reported that he has direct contact with the 
Royal Palace on labor issues.  In early April, Omrani was 
invited to a roundtable meeting with King Abdullah to discuss 
labor issues.  Since then, he has had an on-going dialogue 
with Dr. Khalid Wazani, Director of the Economic Department 
for the Royal Palace.  Omrani said this is a refreshing 
change after being "ignored" for years by the Prime Ministry 
and other GOJ ministries.  He noted that Wazani specifically 
told Omrani to "talk with him first" -- as opposed to the 
ministries -- on issues of concern.  Omrani was very happy to 
report delivery of computers donated by the GOJ, which were 
delivered recently by Wazani.  According to Omrani, Wazani 
will visit the QIZ factories next week, but has requested 
that it be "low-key" with no media or photo opportunities. 
 
¶5. (C)  Omrani was confident that investors will continue to 
invest in the QIZs here.  With the war over, investors are 
"much more relaxed," he said.  He also said that some 
investors reportedly are looking away from investing in 
traditional textile powerhouses in southeast Asia because of 
SARS, and he expects a mild windfall for Jordanian QIZs. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (C)  Omrani is a well organized, politically astute labor 
leader.  Thus, we expect Abu Rahman to be have effective 
backing in his parliamentary campaign in Southern Irbid. 
Given the dearth of organized political entities beyond the 
IAF, a victory by organized labor would be noteworthy. 
 
¶7. (C) From the labor side, the QIZs appear to be in very 
good shape post-Saddam.  Omrani, who has been outspoken and 
disenchanted with the GOJ at various times over the past few 
years, seems to be genuinely mollified by the Palace 
attention to him and his cause, and encouraging union members 
to participate in the forthcoming parliamentary elections. 
 
-------- 
BIO NOTE 
-------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Gibreel Abu Rahman.  Abu Rahman is a 
Palestinian-Jordanian in his mid-thirties.  In 1996, he began 
working at the Al-Aser sewing factory in quality control and 
has risen to become the director of the 2,400 worker textile 
plant.  We have nominated him for this year's international 
visitor's program. 
GNEHM