This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 002841 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM KJUS PGOV HO
SUBJECT: HONDURAN POLICE SEIZE ANOTHER 53 KILOS OF COCAINE, 
MAKING IT 5,000 KILOS IN 2003 
 
 
¶1.  On November 27, Honduran authorities seized approximately 
53 kilos of cocaine from a truck in the remote northern town 
of Bonito Oriental in the Department of Colon.  The cocaine 
valued at approximately USD two million was seized by the 
Honduran Frontier Police, working in cooperation with the 
National Preventive Police at approximately 10:00 a.m. Upon 
being pulled over by authorities, the driver of the truck, 
Norberto Reyes Zavala, was found to be extremely nervous. 
Tipped off by Zavala's agitated demeanor the police searched 
the truck, and only after a lengthy search did the 
authorities discover the cocaine hidden in a rear compartment 
covered by sawdust. 
 
¶2.  Zavala confessed to authorities that two individuals had 
offered him USD 1,400 to transport the cocaine from Sico, 
Colon to Danli, El Paraiso in southern Honduras. Later that 
afternoon, nearly five hours after detaining Zavala, the 
alleged "owner" of the drugs, Jose Daniel Pinto, was captured 
by the police in Tocoa. The deputy investigator in Tocoa was 
notified by informants that the same Mercedes truck driven by 
Zavala had been seen earlier in Sico conversing with Pinto. 
While this information led to Pinto's arrest, Honduran 
authorities continue to investigate alleged links between 
Pinto and Zavala.  Pinto adamantly denies any connection 
between him and the drugs (Note: The reason the police were 
able to detain Pinto is the Honduran law "Affiliation with 
Known Narcotraffickers", which gives authorities the legal 
right to arrest anyone associated with narcotraffickers. End 
Note.) 
 
¶3.  This latest seizure brings the total amount of cocaine 
seized this year in Honduras to approximately 5,000 kilos. 
This is more than what has been seized in the last five years 
combined. 
Palmer