This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/08/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ADCO ADPM YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN'S FM QIRBI ON SECRETARY POWELL'S UNSC IRAQ 
SPEECH AND OTHER MATTERS 
 
REF: A. 02 SANAA 3822 
 
     ¶B. 02 SANAA 3853 
     ¶C. 02 SECSTATE 241052 
     ¶D. SANAA 37 
     ¶E. SANAA 154 
 
Classified By: Acting Pol/Econ Chief Catherine J. Westley.  Reason:  1. 
5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  Charge called on FM Qirbi to discuss the 
Secretary's UNSC speech and ongoing pouch issues (refs) on 
 
SIPDIS 
February 8.  Qirbi's response to the speech was measured, 
noting that it contained circumstantial evidence and 
expressing hope that the evidence can be given to inspectors 
to corroborate before any new UNSCR.  Qirbi looked ahead to 
the inspectors' reports on February 14 and expressed hope 
that there would be no war.  Also present were MFA advisor 
al-Iryani, AdminOff and A/PolEcon Chief (notetaker).  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Iraq and Reaction to Secretary's UNSC Speech 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  Charge said that Secretary Powell's speech clearly 
documented that Iraq is in material breach of UNSCR 1441, and 
noted that the Council might consider a second resolution. 
He underscored the importance of Blix's 2/14 report and 
emphasized that the onus is on Iraq to comply with its 
obligations.  Charge pointed out that, while there was no 
timetable for action, President Bush has made clear it must 
be a matter of weeks and not months.  FM Qirbi welcomed 
receipt of a copy of Secretary Powell's speech. 
 
¶3.  (C)  FM Qirbi replied that Powell's speech "obviously" 
contained a lot of "circumstantial evidence" and there were 
many points of view about what the evidence meant.  He 
expressed the view that all evidence should be given to the 
inspectors for follow-up investigation as a preliminary step 
to any new UNSCR.  Qirbi said that the ROYG looked forward to 
Blix's visit to Baghdad, and his report, to document that 
Iraq is not adhering to UNSCR 1441 or that the inspectors 
need more time.  The FM said that "we in Yemen and in the 
region" hope there will be no invasion and no war, as this 
would "destabilize the delicate situation" in the region.  He 
noted approvingly that the U.S., while sustaining pressure on 
Baghdad, was also showing some flexibility in its approach. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Qirbi also mentioned a speech by the Hezbollah 
Secretary General on February 7, which he perceived as 
 
SIPDIS 
addressing an admonitory message to Saddam.  The FM said the 
speech opposed war, but also called for institutional and 
political change in Iraq and placed the onus on Saddam to 
initiate a reform process. 
 
----- 
Pouch 
----- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Charge also brought up the diplomatic pouch issue 
and asked whether the FM had met with PSO Chief Gamish to 
finalize the last pending detail of the pouch guidelines 
worked out between Qirbi and Amb. Hull.  Qirbi noted that 
Gamish had just returned to Yemen February 6 after a lengthy 
stay abroad, and said he would try to meet with him before 
Eid.  Charge noted that the issue remained an Embassy 
priority and was followed at very high levels in the State 
Department.  AdminOff expressed appreciation for the MFA's 
assistance in facilitating the arrival of five classified 
pouch bags February 7, and also expressed concern that one of 
the bags was briefly, and apparently inadvertently, 
mishandled. 
 
---------------- 
CBW Escape Masks 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  (C) Charge informed FM Qirbi that CBW protective masks 
for Embassy Sanaa personnel had been held up in Customs for 
some weeks.  He asked for Qirbi's help if necessary to get 
the masks released before Eid, and Qirbi agreed. 
 
------------------------------------ 
MEPI; Heightened U.S. Security Alert 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (C)  Charge referred to the just-completed visit of 
NEA/RA Director Grappo, noting that it had been productive 
and should improve prospects for assistance to Yemen under 
the rubric of the Middle East Partnership Initiative.  Qirbi 
expressed gratitude and said that it is always useful to have 
officials come to Yemen so they can see for themselves the 
developments made and challenges faced in the country. 
Charge also described the recent worldwide security alerts, 
noting that these general alerts focused on the United States 
and the Persian Gulf (including Yemen), but that there were 
no known specific threats in Yemen.  Charge thanked Qirbi for 
the continuing excellent security provided by the ROYG to 
safeguard U.S. locations and personnel in Yemen. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Finally, Charge passed to Qirbi several letters, 
including the Secretary's Eid messages to him and the Prime 
Minister and the response to Qirbi's MEPI letter and the 
President's Eid message to President Saleh. 
MISENHEIMER