This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 001207 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/24/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL BM
SUBJECT: BURMA: ROAD(MAP) RALLIES 
 
REF: A. RANGOON 1093 
     ¶B. RANGOON 1057 
 
Classified By: COM Carmen Martinez for Reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY: The Union Solidarity and Development 
Association (USDA), a mass membership organization sponsored 
by the ruling SPDC, staged massive rallies on September 20 in 
Rangoon and Mandalay as a show of support for Prime Minister 
General Khin Nyunt's "Road Map to Democracy."  The junta will 
repeat these rigid, tightly controlled mass rallies in the 
remaining division and state capitals over the next three 
weeks.  On September 22, SPDC Chairman Senior General Than 
Shwe appointed thirteen new members to the National 
Convention Convening Commission, a group that is dominated by 
senior military officers, like the Commission's executive 
leadership selected several weeks ago (ref a).  The rallies 
and appointments are further signs that the SPDC is moving 
toward convening the National Convention without the 
participation of the democratic opposition.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) On September 20, the USDA held massive political 
rallies in Rangoon and Mandalay to drum up support for the 
SPDC's seven-step "Road Map to Democracy" (ref b).  According 
to GOB and independent sources, over 15,000 USDA partisans 
and members of government organizations packed an indoor 
arena in downtown Rangoon, and nearly 20,000 participated in 
a similar event held at an outdoor sports stadium in 
Mandalay.  USDA members from a cross section of Burma's civil 
service, blue collar, and artisan classes attended, all 
carefully segregated by professional occupation and dressed 
in USDA-mandated uniforms for each of their columns. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The regime's official newspaper, the New Light of 
Myanmar, has given four straight days of front page coverage 
to the rallies, including photos of thousands of youths lined 
up in neat civilian uniforms.  The images of uniformed and 
thoroughly bored USDA partisans eerily bring to mind rallies 
of yesteryear totalitarian regimes.  Pictures of the rallies 
also appeared on the SPDC's website (www.myanmar.com), 
including images of USDA brass leading slogans with raised, 
clenched fists. 
 
¶4. (U) On September 23, SPDC Chairman Senior General Than 
Shwe appointed thirteen new members to the National 
Convention Convening Commission, the body responsible for 
oversight of a National Convention and the drafting of a new 
constitution.  Six of the new members are senior military 
officers, including Brigadier General Than Tun, who serves as 
the regime's liaison with Aung San Suu Kyi. 
 
¶5. (C) COMMENT:  This is the first time the SPDC's 
mouthpiece, "The New Light of Myanmar," has given extensive 
coverage to USDA activities since the May 30 Depeyin attack 
on ASSK and NLD supporters.  USDA members played a key role 
in planning and carrying out that attack.  Holding such large 
rallies now, coupled with SPDC promotions of local officials 
associated with the attack, are strong indications that the 
junta feels very secure in its control over the democratic 
opposition.  As for next steps, we have no clear indication 
on a timeline for reconvening the National Convention. 
However, given heavy military control of the Convening 
Commission and the prominent role the SPDC has carved out for 
itself in any potential transition, local Burmese joke that 
the "Myanmar Road Map" is really nothing more than a "MI 
(Military Intelligence) Road Map."  END COMMENT. 
Martinez