This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ZAGREB 001719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/SCE, EUR/NCE AND PM/HDP 
BELGRADE PLEASE SHARE WITH PODGORICA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/31/2013 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID KHDP SI HR
SUBJECT: CROATIAN GOVERNMENT: ITF DIRECTOR CIMPERSEK MUST GO 
 
REF: LJUBLJANA 0749 
 
Classified By: PolOff Darren Taylor for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) The Government of Croatia is frustrated with the 
leadership of the International Trust Fund and will block 
extension ITF director Jernej Cimpersek's mandate.  GoC 
officials expressed their frustration with Cimpersek's lack 
of professionalism and his unwillingness to focus on all 
donor priorities which, they claim, has led to a 
"polarization" of the demining community in the Balkans. 
They acknowledged that Cimpersek has been difficult to work 
with, but rejected the allegation that their decision was 
based on personality conflict.  The GoC asserted that their 
decision is firm; as an extension can be passed only by 
consensus of the managing board, it appears Cimpersek's days 
as Director are numbered.  GoC officials said they would 
prepare a position paper for the ITF managing board and key 
donors outlining reasons for their position.  End Summary. 
 
GOC:  "It's Time For A Change at the ITF" 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) On July 28, we met with senior GOC officials involved 
in the work of the International Trust Fund (ITF).  Present 
were Minister of Labor and Social Welfare Davorko Vidovic, 
MFA Advisor for Demining Dijana Plestina, and Croatian Mine 
Action Center (CROMAC) Director Oto Jungwirth.  Plestina -- 
who is PM Racan's wife -- described Croatia's building 
frustration with ITF Director Cimpersek.  She said the ITF 
managing board reacted strongly to Croatia's announcement at 
the July 22 board meeting at which it blocked extension of 
Cimpersek's mandate, but insisted that Croatia's decision is 
firm.  Labor Minister Vidovic said that the position Plestina 
presented was the view of the GoC, and that the decision to 
block Cimpersek's extension had been taken in advance of the 
July 22 meeting.  The decision was final and would not be 
reversed under any circumstances, asserted Minister Vidovic. 
 
¶3.  (C) Vidovic said that there have been a series of 
incidents over the past year in which Cimpersek and his 
deputy Goran Gacnik had acted inappropriately, both in public 
and at regional fora on humanitarian demining.  It seemed at 
times that their goal was to embarrass GOC officials present 
at the meetings or Croatia in general.  He stated that while 
the GOC was not completely innocent of responsibility for the 
strained relationship, GOC officials were always willing to 
sit at the table to discuss ways to find solutions. 
 
¶4.  (C) Vidovic explained that as the third largest donor to 
the ITF behind the US and EU, the GoC recognizes its 
responsibility to support the ITF's role in the region.  The 
ITF has contributed to important positive developments in 
demining in the region, but the current leadership of the ITF 
seems to have lost sight of the fact that it is the donors, 
not the ITF staff, which are most responsible for these 
successes.  Vidovic said he had instructed key personnel to 
draft a position paper outlining the GOC's position 
concerning the ITF leadership, a copy of which will be 
provided to ITF managing board members and key donors.  He 
had also alerted FM Picula about this issue to prepare him 
for possible engagement. 
¶5. (C) Plestina and Jungwirth stated that most of their 
concerns centered on issues of professionalism, regional 
ethnic biases, and the polarization of the demining community 
in the region.  They claimed they made repeated efforts to 
improve their working relationship with the ITF, but 
Cimpersek seemed to prefer to distance himself from Croatia 
and engage as little as possible on Croatian matters.  When 
he did engage, it was often in a rude, uncooperative, or 
unprofessional manner.  During bilateral meetings, the ITF 
director would launch into tirades about what the ITF was or 
was not willing do in Croatia, and how Croats are his biggest 
problem in the region.  Plestina claimed other 
representatives from regional mine action centers had lodged 
similar complaints. 
 
USG Intervention Appreciated, But Unsuccessful 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. (C) Vidovic and Plestina expressed appreciation for USG 
efforts to improve the relationship with Cimpersek, 
especially PM Assistant Secretary Bloomfield's personal 
involvement during a GOC-sponsored conference on demining in 
Dubrovnik in October 2002.  They noted that even in the 
presence of senior USG officials, the ITF director displayed 
unprofessional behavior and used unacceptable language at 
 
times when contentious issues were discussed. 
 
¶7. (C) Plestina claimed that although they had low 
expectations, the GoC had made efforts to improve the working 
relationship after the meeting in Dubrovnik, if for no other 
reason than they had been asked to do so by the USG.  But 
Cimpersek showed signs that he was unwilling to take steps to 
improve the relationship.  He did not attend meetings that 
were held in Croatia and refused to travel to Croatia for 
some time.  He has been unwilling to meet with GOC leaders to 
discuss ways of improving cooperation or to solicit GOC views 
about developments at the ITF. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) The GoC decision to block Cimpersek's extension does 
not come as a surprise; Plestina and CROMAC have complained 
to us many times in the past, and we have been present at 
meetings when Cimpersek has acted inappropriately.  The 
presence of Labor Minister Vidovic at the July 28 meeting was 
clearly intended to ensure that we understood that the GoC 
decision is a formal cabinet position and not just a 
reflection of a personality conflict between the ITF director 
and the PM's wife.  Vidovic has in the past told us that he 
does not want the disagreement over the leadership of the ITF 
to become an irritant, but wants to make sure we understand 
that the GoC position is final. 
 
¶9. (C) We concur with the GoC that it is time for Cimpersek 
to go and suggest that the managing board should seek a new, 
more professional director who is committed to working 
closely with governments in the region and with the main 
donors, both in the field and in donor capitals. 
FRANK 
 
 
NNNN