This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L LAGOS 002357 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/14/2013 
TAGS: ASEC EPET PINR NI CACS
SUBJECT: AMCITS NOT/NOT TAKEN HOSTAGE IN DELTA - CHEVRON 
USES NEW STRATEGY 
 
 
Classified By: J GREGOIRE FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (C) 
 
 
¶1. (C)  Chevron's special security manager, Hamish Macdonald 
(sic), told Econoff on November 14 that no Americans were 
taken hostage in an incident earlier this week.  Press 
reports indicate that four barges and 21 Chevron contractors 
were seized by Ijaw youths in the riverine area near Warri on 
November 11.  The hostages and barges were reported to have 
been released the following day. 
 
 
¶2. (C) Macdonald said that all the kidnapped contractors were 
Nigerian, and that Chevron was able to secure their release 
shortly after the company was made aware of their capture. 
He said that while the barges were retrieved, equipment and 
foodstuffs onboard had been pilfered and vandalized. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Macdonald further told Econoff that Chevron employed a 
new strategy in dealing with the incident that should prove a 
successful model for similar incidents and for ongoing 
negotiations with communities for access to and safety of oil 
installations in the Delta swamps.  Macdonald was reluctant 
to go into detail via mobile phone, but he said the company 
used the Delta State Security Council to secure the release 
of the hostages and barges.  He said that unlike previous 
incidents, the Council was effective this week because it 
convened key community leaders and traditional rulers that 
held sway with the youths involved. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Macdonald said Chevron paid no money and made no 
promises for return of the kidnapped personnel and stolen 
barges; he said "this was handled the right way, and the way 
we all should handle community relations."  He said he was 
encouraged by the prospect of using the new strategy to help 
return Chevron to its onshore fields in the Delta.  Macdonald 
offered to meet Econoff in person next week to discuss the 
steps taken in this incident. 
HINSON-JONES