This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005584 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/04/2008 
TAGS: PGOV PREL CASC PHUM IZ TU
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR, INTERIOR MINISTER DISCUSS PKK, IRAQI 
POLICE TRAINING 
 
 
REF: ANKARA 4499 
 
 
Classified by Ambassador Eric S. Edelman; reasons 1.5 b and d. 
 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In a September 2 introductory meeting with 
the Ambassador, Interior Minister Aksu called on the U.S. to 
take action against the PKK/KADEK in northern Iraq and 
offered training for Iraqi police.  The Ambassador said the 
USG and GOT will soon discuss an approach to the PKK/KADEK 
problem.  The Ambassador thanked Aksu for his cooperation 
with the Embassy on security, and emphasized the importance 
of protecting cruise ships in Turkish ports.  He urged 
continued GOT progress on combating human trafficking and 
resolving child abduction cases, and offered Embassy support. 
 End Summary. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
Aksu: US Must take Action Against PKK 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) Noting that the PKK/KADEK is on the USG list of 
terrorist organizations, Aksu said the GOT expects the U.S. 
to take "the necessary actions" against the 4,500-5,000 
PKK/KADEK fighters in northern Iraq.  The GOT has adopted a 
Reintegration Law to encourage militants to surrender 
(reftel), but top PKK/KADEK leaders, who are excluded from 
the benefits of the law, are undermining the effort.  The 
organization's leaders have attacked Turkish military and 
police units, and have prevented militants from learning 
about the law.  It is now the responsibility of the U.S., he 
argued, to take action.  The Ambassador noted that President 
Bush has stated unequivocally the need to eliminate the 
threat of terror emanating from Iraq, and that includes 
PKK/KADEK.  The U.S. military has its hands full in Iraq 
right now and has not developed a plan for dealing with the 
PKK/KADEK.  The USG will be contacting GOT officials in the 
coming weeks to discuss how to approach the problem.  One 
element might be an information campaign to make sure 
militants are aware of the Reintegration Law.  At the same 
time, the U.S. will continue to press European countries to 
recognize KADEK as a terrorist organization -- the PKK with a 
different name -- and outlaw its fundraising efforts. 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
GOT Offers Iraqi Police Training 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Aksu said he has seen media reports that the U.S. has 
contacted a number of countries to ask whether they could 
provide training for Iraqi police.  Turkey, which has not 
been contacted, is ready and able to provide such training. 
The GOT operates police training centers in 26 provinces and 
has trained officers from 28 countries.  UN officials have 
praised Turkish police courses, he said.  The Ambassador 
undertook to convey the GOT's interest in providing training 
to Washington and Baghdad. 
 
 
---------------------------------- 
Security for Embassy, Cruise Ships 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) The Ambassador thanked Aksu for his leadership in 
ensuring close cooperation between the Embassy and Interior 
Ministry on security, both for the Embassy community and 
official visitors.  Security is a very important issue for 
the Embassy, especially given the tensions related to the war 
in Iraq and its aftermath.  Embassy security would be 
enhanced if police conducted random car searches on Paris 
Caddesi, which borders the Embassy.  There would be some 
inconvenience to drivers, but random searches would provide a 
deterrent to anyone considering a car bomb attack.  We are 
also concerned about indications that terrorists are focusing 
on "soft targets."  Noting that Princess Cruise Lines has 
resumed calls to Turkish ports, he said these cruise ships, 
carrying American tourists, could be targeted.  The Embassy 
is eager to work with the GOT to prevent an attack.  Aksu 
replied that Turkish security forces will continue to take 
all necessary measures to protect the Embassy and tourists. 
He said he gave instructions to the Coast Guard and Jandarma 
before the return of the cruise ships to enhance security. 
He will instruct the Ankara Security Director to meet with 
Embassy security officials to discuss these issues. 
 
 
------------------------ 
Anti-Trafficking Efforts 
------------------------ 
 
 
¶5. (U) The Ambassador said he is aware of the recent GOT 
efforts to combat trafficking in persons (TIP).  The 
challenge for the next year will be to fully implement the 
new measures.  We recommend that the GOT enhance its anti-TIP 
efforts by: launching a public relations campaign to raise 
awareness of TIP; creating shelters for TIP victims; 
establishing a repatriation program for victims; and 
providing data on arrests and prosecutions under anti-TIP 
legislation.  Aksu responded that trafficking is an important 
issue for the GOT, receiving close attention.  Law 
enforcement efforts to combat the crime are having an effect, 
reflected in a steady decline in the number of illegal 
workers arrested over the last several years. 
 
 
--------------- 
Child Abduction 
--------------- 
 
 
¶6. (U) The Ambassador thanked Aksu for his assistance in 
locating missing children and parents in a number of child 
abduction cases involving Amcits.  We look forward to 
continued cooperation with Aksu on resolving these tragic 
cases.  We would be grateful if Interior Ministry officials 
could update the Embassy on the efforts to locate the missing 
child in the Sensoy child abduction case.  Aksu said he would 
instruct the Ankara Security Director and the national 
Security Directorate General to designate points of contact 
for the Embassy on abduction cases.  (Note: Police officials 
informed the Consular Section September 3 that they had 
"narrowed" the search for the missing child in the Sensoy 
case.  End Note). 
 
 
¶7. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDELMAN