This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 001719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/20/2013 
TAGS: AEMR AMGT ASEC CASC CVIS IZ JO
SUBJECT: TFIZO1: AMMAN SITREP 7 (3/22 1845 LOCAL) 
 
 
Classified By: Acting DCM Doug Silliman. Reason 1.5 (b,d). 
 
---------------- 
General Overview 
---------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The Embassy maintained a standfast posture 
throughout 3/22, but will open 3/23 on a regular work 
schedule.  However, American personnel will be limited to 
essential movements. 
 
¶2. (C) Scattered demonstrations and protests occurred around 
the country today, but far fewer than yesterday.  In Irbid, 
the Islamic Action Front (IAF) organized a rally (ongoing as 
of 1700 local) of approximately 2,000 people where a series 
of speakers have been denouncing U.S. aggression against 
Iraq.  PSD security personnel are present and there have been 
no reports of violence.  At 1500 local time, PSD reported 
that a protest involving 2,000 young people was ongoing in 
the Baqa'a Palestinian refugee camp.  The protesters have 
thrown rocks at the police who have responded with teargas. 
The protest remains confined to the camp.  A candlelight 
vigil is planned for this evening in the Shmeisani 
neighborhood of Amman.  Finally, the southern city of Ma'an 
has been quiet all day, following yesterday's protests that 
involved several thousand people.  The PSD says that one 
protester was injured in yesterday's demonstrations, but 
denies rumors that one or more protesters may have been 
killed. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Queen Alia International Airport (QAIA) continues 
regular operations.  Royal Jordanian Airlines continues 
service to all destinations, with the exception of Baghdad. 
Air France restored its Amman-Paris route today and will 
operate it on a reduced level as events and passenger loads 
dictate.  It is the first European carrier to resume flights. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Mobile and fixed-line telecommunications continue 
uninterrupted, although there have been occasional delays in 
international service over the past few days due to the large 
volume of traffic, according to local telecom officials. 
 
 
--------------- 
Consular Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶5. (C) IOM reports that one Amcit and a Japanese citizen 
crossed into Jordan from Iraq today.  IOM transported them to 
Ruweished, where they hired a taxi to Amman.  Inquiries to 
the Consular section continue to be very light. 
 
---------------------- 
GOJ Actions/Statements 
---------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) None since previous sitrep. 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶7. (C) Cooperation with all GOJ security agencies continues 
to be excellent.  Additional security measures around the 
Embassy remain in place, although the additional riot police 
that were deployed yesterday prior to Friday prayers were 
removed. 
 
--------------------------- 
Refugee/Humanitarian Issues 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8. (C)  The Jordan-Iraq border remains open.  The flow of 
people into Jordan continues to be light and limited to TCNs; 
no Iraqi asylum seekers have yet to attempted to enter 
Jordan.  Some TCNs who have crossed report that Iraqi 
military forces are preventing Iraqis from leaving Iraq. 
UNHCR and IOM are investigating this claim.  As of 1200 local 
time 329 TCNs are at the IOM/JRCS transit camp in Ruweished. 
Of this total are 229 Sudanese, 30 Somalis and a handful of 
other nationalities. 
----- 
Press 
----- 
¶9. (C) Embassy IO and Centcom PA detailee briefed U.S. 
reporters congregated at Ruweished on the continued dangers 
of crossing into Iraqi territory.  Journalists are 
increasingly frantic to get across the border, even, it 
appears, in the face of our attempts to explain the dangers 
of such a trip.  While at Ruweished, a local UNHCR 
representative phoned IO and asked if USG could pass on any 
intelligence or other information regarding movements of 
Iraqis from inside Iraq toward the Iraq/Jordan border. 
 
¶10. (C) CNN began running a report quoting "Kurdish sources" 
that U.S. Special Forces would be landing in Northern Iraq 
from Jordan.  We've received a few questions for comment. 
Our posture has been not to comment on the specific report. 
Jordanian officials told us that they will continue to deny 
such reports. 
GNEHM