This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 001702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, DRL/PHD, AND EB/TRA 
STATE FOR WHA, WHA/PPC, AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/17/2013 
TAGS: SNAR PGOV KJUS ASEC HO KRCM
SUBJECT: LARGEST DRUG BUST IN HONDURAN HISTORY YIELDS 
APPROXIMATELY 2,000 KILOS OF COCAINE 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Larry L. Palmer for Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D). 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  On July 16 Honduran authorities seized 
approximately 2,000 kilos of cocaine hidden in a secret 
compartment aboard the "Broad Fire Leader," a Cayman Islands 
flagged vessel that had departed Panama July 11.  The vessel 
docked at French Harbor, Roatan, a small Bay Island port not 
normally associated with international commerce.  The police 
arrested six Honduran nationals; two crew members and four 
other individuals associated with the operation.  This 
seizure is being touted as the largest in Honduran history. 
It raises the total amount of cocaine seized this year in 
Honduras to almost 4,000 kilos.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (C) On July 16 Honduran authorities seized approximately 
2,000 kilos of cocaine hidden in a secret compartment aboard 
the "Broad Fire Leader," a Cayman Islands flagged vessel with 
registration number 731916 that had departed Panama July 11. 
The vessel was docked at French Harbor, Roatan, a small port 
not normally associated with international commerce. 
According to press reports, police were alerted to the 
presence of the vessel by an anonymous phone call.  Police 
spokesman Leonel Sauceda stated that the special 
investigative police, known as the DGIC had prior knowledge 
concerning the ship's illicit activities.  Authorities 
arrived on the scene at approximately 0600 but did not board 
the vessel until 0700.  (Comment:  In fact, the Embassy TAT 
passed intelligence information to the INL funded joint 
intelligence center (CEINCO) that then forwarded the 
information to the DGIC. End Comment.) 
 
¶3. (C) The ship's manifest stated that its cargo of beer, 
tires, and electronic goods was intended for a local Honduran 
business, but authorities soon determined the business did 
not exist.  Due to foot-dragging by Public Ministry 
prosecutors, however, police did not actually search the 
vessel until approximately 1730, over 11 hours after the fist 
call had been placed to the District Attorney's office. 
Police then brought in drug sniffing dogs which alerted 
authorities to the existence of drugs on the ship.  A cursory 
observation of the vessel suggested a secret compartment 
below the main hold.  A search of this compartment yielded 92 
packages of cocaine totaling approximately 2,000 kilos. 
 
¶4. (U) Police immediately arrested the ship's two captains, 
Danley Miles Woods (38) and Edmund Kickson (49), both 
Honduran nationals and residents of Roatan.  Police later 
arrested four other Honduran nationals associated with the 
operation: Ricky McKensi (24); Ferry McKensi (26); Chrisman 
Lee McKensi (18); and Orny Johnson (19) 
Palmer