This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 005144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR PM, EUR 
OSD FOR ASD/ISP (BRZEZINSKI AND HEALD), ASD/C3I 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/13/2013 
TAGS: ETTC KSCA KSTC PARM TU
SUBJECT: SPACE COOPERATION: GOT IS ANXIOUS TO CONCLUDE A 
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT 
 
¶1. (U) Classified by Charge d'Affaires a.i. Robert Deutsch. 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶2. (U) Action request at paragraph 7. 
 
 
¶3. (C) Following the conclusion of the "Statement of Intent 
between the United States Department of Defense and the 
Turkish General Staff for Defense Space Cooperation" in July 
2002, the GOT continues to stress strong interest in 
concluding a memorandum of understanding that will establish 
the specific framework for space cooperation between the USG 
and the GOT. Representatives from the Pol-Mil Affairs 
section, the Defense Attache Office, and the Office of 
Defense Cooperation recently met with Colonel Yavuz Goker, 
Chief of the Aerospace Branch of the Turkish Air Force 
(TUAF), to discuss this issue. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Goker reported that the GOT had expected a draft MOU 
from the USG by the end of 2002, and the MOU to be concluded 
by May 2003. The delay in moving forward on this issue has 
caused a great deal of frustration within the TUAF, according 
to Goker. The former TUAF Commander, Cumhur Asparuk, was the 
signature authority for the GOT for the MOU, but his 
authority has expired due to his recent retirement. The GOT 
must now go through another lengthy internal process to 
designate a new officer with signature authority. At the same 
time, Goker stressed that the GOT is ready to look elsewhere 
for assistance with its space program (Russia, China, or the 
United Kingdom are possibilities) if an MOU is not concluded 
soon with the USG. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Goker also gave an overview of the GOT's current space 
activities and plans for the future. He noted that Turkey 
will embark on a program to develop a reconnaissance 
satellite in 2005, and that the GOT is currently assessing 
the extent to which foreign assistance will be required to 
complete this project. He also said that Turkey would like to 
send a Turkish astronaut on one of NASA's space missions. 
Obtaining the funds to support a robust space program will 
not be difficult once the GOT reaches a cooperative agreement 
with a specific country, according to Goker. 
 
 
¶6. (C) The training of personnel for the Turkish space 
program is a priority of the TUAF. Goker said that Turkey has 
divided its training requirements into a beginner course, a 
project officer course, and an engineering-level course. The 
TUAF has budgeted $200,000 for a beginner's course that is 
currently being taught by Stanford University and is 
budgeting $200,000 for the same type of course in 2004. The 
TUAF is also waiting on an official confirmation from the Air 
Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) for inclusion of two 
Turkish officers in the 2004 Operations Space Prerequisite 
Training (OSPT) course, and for five slots for Turkish 
officers in the same course annually, beginning with the 2005 
iteration. This should satisfy the project officer course 
requirement. In order to provide the engineering-level 
training, the Turkish Air Force Academy has created an Air 
and Space Technological Institute (HUTEN). Ten Turkish 
students will begin the HUTEN program in the fall of this 
year, and the GOT plans to train ten students annually within 
this program. 
 
 
¶7. (C) ACTION REQUEST: U.S.-Turkey space cooperation has been 
one of the central issues discussed during recent meetings of 
the High Level Defense Group. TGS certainly will raise this 
issue when the two countries next meet (tentatively this 
November in Washington). Embassy Ankara therefore requests 
that Washington provide an update regarding its intention to 
conclude an MOU on space cooperation with the GOT. 
DEUTSCH