This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KUWAIT 002451 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS USTR J. BUNTIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR ETRD KU USTR
SUBJECT: KUWAITI GOVERNOR PLEDGES IPR SUPPORT 
 
REF: A. KUWAIT 01989 
 
     ¶B. STATE 123166 
 
¶1. SUMMARY. As part of a new push for much needed 
intellectual property rights (IPR) reform in Kuwait, 
following the release in May of the latest Special 301 review 
(reftels), the Ambassador met June 3 with the Governor of 
Hawally, where most of Kuwait's pirated goods are repeatedly 
produced and sold.  The Ambassador voiced his concern that 
Kuwait's poor record on IPR protection and enforcement was 
tarnishing its image to investors and was possibly linked to 
more serious crimes, such as drug sales and terrorist 
financing.  The Governor agreed and said he was willing to 
support the USG in its efforts, including meeting with the 
Minister of Interior to discuss ways to improve enforcement 
of Kuwait's copyright laws.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. On June 3, 2003, the Ambassador met with the Governor of 
Hawally, AbdulHameed Haji AbdulRaheem, and members of his 
staff to discuss IPR issues in Kuwait.  AbdulRaheem served 
for 15 years in Kuwait's Ministry of Interior before becoming 
governor three years ago.  Hawally, one of six governorates 
in the country, is the site of the majority of Kuwait's sale 
of illegal audio visual goods, which account for 95 percent 
of the motion pictures and nearly 65 percent of the music 
sold in the country, according to latest industry estimates. 
The Ambassador was joined by Econoff as notetaker and a 
Foreign Commercial Service specialist. 
 
¶3. The Ambassador explained to AbdulRaheem that with the 
release of the Special 301 review the Embassy was undertaking 
a new push for IPR reform in Kuwait.  This effort included 
encouraging the GOK to pass amendments to its copyright law 
(as it promised to do more than a year ago) and seeking ways 
to assist the GOK in curbing rampant IPR violations.  The 
Ambassador noted that copyright violations continue to pose a 
serious problem and are tarnishing Kuwait's image among 
investors, resulting in a large loss of revenue to other 
countries in the region.  He also voiced concern over the 
link between IPR piracy and other crimes, including the 
prospect of terrorist financing, as many of the pirated goods 
entering Kuwait come from Indonesia, Pakistan, and other 
countries known for terrorist activities. 
 
¶4. The Ambassador said he met recently with members of 
industry (including from Microsoft and the Motion Picture 
Association), who claimed that the main problem in Kuwait was 
one of enforcement, deriving from the fact that Kuwait's 
Ministry of Information has the authority but lacks the 
manpower or will to make adequate arrests.  AbdulRaheem 
agreed that the police force, under the Ministry of Interior, 
would be more effective at making raids and leading 
investigations, should they be granted the legal authority to 
do so. 
 
¶5. AbdulRaheem said he would be willing to meet with the 
Minister of Interior to discuss ways to restructure the 
present system so that the police might become more involved. 
 He also pledged his support to the Ambassador in the 
Embassy's efforts to encourage IPR reform in Kuwait.  The 
Ambassador, in turn, said he would ask to meet with the 
Ministers of Information and Interior to discuss this issue. 
JONES