This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  ROME 002737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOTE BY CIB: PROCESS AS IS PER EAO STEVE ROYSTER" 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/17/2013 
TAGS: PREL IT AG LY MO SY TS LE EUN
SUBJECT: FM FRATTINI'S VISIT TO SIX ARAB COUNTIES PRIOR TO 
ITALY'S EU PRESIDENCY 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 157980 
 
     ¶B. ROME 2642 
 
Classified By: ACTING POL MC JOHN BASS FOR REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: FM Frattini's pre-EU Presidency visits to 
Rabat, Tripoli, Tunis, Algiers, Beirut, and Damascus June 4-9 
showcased Italy's priority on improving Euro-Med cooperation 
but otherwise generated no surprises.  Frattini introduced 
Italy's EU Presidency priorities, promoted the roadmap and 
stressed the importance of seizing the current window of 
opportunity to advance the MEPP.  Frattini repeated the US' 
and Italy's serious reservations about Libya's UNSC 
candidacy; FM Shalgam said Qadhafi would make the final 
decision.  The Syrian and Lebanese Presidents asked to add a 
"Syrian and Lebanese track" to the roadmap.  End summary. 
 
----- 
Libya 
----- 
 
¶2. (C) Pol NEA Watcher met with Antonio Bellavia and Luca 
Ferrari, the MFA's office directors for Libya/Maghreb 
countries and the Eastern Med, respectively, to get a 
read-out on Frattini's June 4-9 trip to the Middle and Near 
East.  Frattini met Qadhafi, PM Shameck and FM Shalgam June 
¶5.  According to Bellavia, Shalgam told Frattini that Libya 
has not yet decided for sure to pursue a UNSC seat and that 
the final decision on this matter would be Qadhafi's (ref B). 
 Shalgam added that Libya expects to solve the Lockerbie case 
by the end of the year, thus eliminating the main obstacle in 
front of a Libya candidacy.  Frattini stressed to Shalgam 
that, even if Libya were to meet its obligations regarding 
the Pan Am 103 bombing by the end of 2003, the US and Italy 
would still find Libya's UNSC candidacy inappropriate. 
Frattini explained that it would still take more time for 
Libya to establish a track record of contributing to the 
maintenance of international peace and security, a UN charter 
prerequisite for membership on the SC (ref A), before the 
international community could view Libya's UNSC candidacy 
favorably.  On the MEPP, Shalgam was neither in favor nor 
against the roadmap.  He said that "what is good for the 
Palestinians is good for Libya." 
 
--------------------- 
THE MAGHREB COUNTRIES 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Frattini met Moroccan PM Jettou June 4, Tunisian FM 
Ben Yahia June 6 and Algerian President Bouteflika and FM 
Belqhadem June 7.  Frattini stressed the need to seize the 
opportunity created by the Sharm El Sheikh and Al Aqaba 
summits to advance the MEPP and urged the three Maghreb 
countries to support the roadmap.  Morocco, Tunisia, and 
Algeria supported the roadmap and promised to do what they 
could to promote peace in the Middle East.  According to 
Bellavia, Frattini also tried to eliminate widespread 
concerns in the Maghreb countries that the EU enlargement to 
the East would diminish the EU's commitment to the Med 
region.  Frattini underlined that the Med region is a 
priority of the Italian EU Presidency.  Italy will host a 
Euro-Med conference in Naples in early December.  Frattini 
said that Italy supports the idea of establishing a bank to 
fund development projects in the Southern Med region as well 
as a foundation that promotes cultural dialogue between Arab 
and European Med countries. 
 
----------------- 
SYRIA AND LEBANON 
----------------- 
 
¶4. (C) Frattini met Lebanese President Lahoud and FM Obeid 
June 8 and Syrian President Assad and FM Al-Shara June 9. 
According to Ferrari, Lahoud and Assad stressed the need to 
"activate the Lebanese and Syrian track" to reach a just, 
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region.  Assad 
suggested having another roadmap or amending the existing one 
for that purpose.  He specifically proposed that, during the 
Italian Presidency, the EU would work with Syria on 
developing a mechanism based on the principles of the Madrid 
Conference and UN resolutions 242 and 338 in order to 
re-launch negotiations.  Frattini underscored Italy's 
commitment to the MEPP, stressed that the GOI plans to 
 
 
cooperate closely with the US during its EU Presidency, and 
that negotiations should reach a just, comprehensive and 
lasting solution that includes Syria and Lebanon. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: Frattini's trip to the above six Arab 
countries, just prior to PM Berlusconi's trip to Israel, 
Jordan and Egypt (to be reported septel), stresses the great 
emphasis the Italian EU Presidency will place on the MEPP and 
the Med region.  When it comes to the Middle and Near East, 
there seems to be a division of labor between Berlusconi and 
Frattini, with Berlusconi keeping the "sexier" portfolio to 
himself. 
Sembler 
NNNN 
 2003ROME02737 - Classification: CONFIDENTIAL