This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000591 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR J. FRAZER 
LONDON FOR C. GURNEY 
PARIS FOR C. NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR T. PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/01/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV ASEC ZI
SUBJECT: MILITARY, POLICE AND CIO LAUNCH NATIONWIDE 
CRACKDOWN ON STAYAWAY PLANNERS 
 
REF: A. HARARE 570 
     ¶B. HARARE 557 
     ¶C. HARARE 546 
     ¶D. HARARE 515 
 
Classified By: Political Officer Audu Besmer for reasons 1.5 b/d. 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
¶1. (C) There are credible reports that the GOZ has undertaken 
a campaign of retribution against MDC activists and 
supporters across the country since the first day of the 
MDC-organized stayaway on March 18.  Police have arrested 
over a hundred MDC supporters, and the Zimbabwean Defense 
Forces (ZDF), ZRP, and ZANU-PF youths have beaten dozens of 
perceived MDC supporters.  We anticipate that the GOZ may 
continue to use the stayaway as an excuse to arrest 
ever-higher MDC officials in the coming weeks.  End Summary. 
 
Harare 
------ 
¶2. (U) By March 21, according to the MDC and independent 
press, police in Harare had arrested over 100 suspected MDC 
activists and supporters.  The government-owned The Herald 
reported that only 53 people were arrested in Harare for 
incidents relating to the mass action.  The MDC also reported 
on March 21 that 83 supporters had sought medical help from 
the MDC social welfare division, and had received vouchers 
for medical services at a Harare hospital.  Other observers 
reported seeing dozens of people seeking medical attention 
for beating wounds at local clinics.  Military helicopters 
were still patrolling the skies over Harare on March 21. 
 
Kadoma 
------ 
¶3. (U) On March 19, according to the official press and MDC 
sources police in Kadoma arrested the MDC MP for Kadoma 
Austin Mupandawana and about 33 MDC youths who were marching 
in Kadoma with anti-Mugabe banners and placards.  The MDC 
made efforts to contact Mupandawana and the youths; however, 
they were apparently transferred to undisclosed police 
stations and their whereabouts were still unknown as of March 
¶21. 
 
Masvingo 
-------- 
¶4. (U) On March 18 police arrested and released on the same 
day the MDC MP for Masvingo Central Silas Mangono with other 
MDC youths in Masvingo.  Mangono was arrested and released 
again on March 19. 
 
¶5. (U) By March 21 the independent press and the MDC reported 
that ZDF soldiers beat about 10 people in Masvingo in 
incidents related to the stayaway.  On March 19 ZANU-PF 
youths stoned and destroyed the house of the MDC provincial 
chairman for Masvingo, Ms. Masekesa. 
 
Mutare 
------ 
¶6. (U) On March 19 according to the independent and official 
press, and MDC sources, police arrested the MDC MP for Mutare 
North and MDC Shadow Minister of Defense Giles Mutsekwa and 
eight other MDC supporters.  Police accused Mutsekwa of 
helping to organize the stayaway, at that point in its second 
day, and questioned him about its planning.  He was still in 
police custody on March 21. 
 
One Dead 
-------- 
¶7. (U) On March 18, suspected CIO officers abducted Steven 
Tonera and two other workers from MDC MP for Chimanimani Roy 
Bennett's commercial farm near Epworth (a suburb of Harare) 
accusing them of burning a parastatal Zimbabwe United 
Passenger Company (ZUPCO) bus earlier that day in Epworth. 
All three were beaten severely, Tonera died during the 
beating.  On March 19, 50-60 ZDF soldiers arrived at the farm 
and beat 30 other workers, some severely, including a 55-year 
old woman, with batons and batons covered with barbed wire. 
 
Other Areas 
----------- 
¶8. (U) By March 21 the independent and official press, and 
the MDC, reported that police had arrested 18 people in 
Gweru, and 13 in Bulawayo in incidents related to the 
stayaway. 
 
¶9. (U) By March 21, the MDC reported that police, ZANU-PF 
youth, and ZDF soldiers had arrested, beaten, and destroyed 
the homes of dozens of MDC provincial chairman, MDC 
officials, lawyers, supporters and activists in the past 
2-days, accusing them of helping to plan and carry out the 
March 18-19 mass stayaway. 
Comment: 
¶10. (C) The GOZ appeared taken aback by the success of the 
March 18 - 19 stayaway and now seems determined to exact 
retribution from those responsible for organizing it.  The 
Herald reported that police were moving in on the MDC 
leadership who organized it, and we would anticipate that the 
GOZ will continue to use the stayaway as an excuse to crack 
down on ever higher MDC officials in the coming weeks, most 
likely accusing them under the draconian Public Order and 
Security Act, (POSA) of instigating public violence.  End 
Comment. 
SULLIVAN