This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L RANGOON 000429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
BEIJING PASS CHENGDU 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 4/06/13 
TAGS: PGOV PREF PHUM BM
SUBJECT: DEMOCRACY DEMONSTRATOR RECEIVES SANCTUARY INSIDE 
BRITISH EMBASSY 
 
 
Classified By:  COM CARMEN MARTINEZ. REASON: 1.5 (D) 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY:  A young man involved in a sidewalk 
pro-democracy demonstration April 4 dashed into the British 
embassy to avoid arrest and as of April 7, remains inside. 
His co-demonstrator, a monk from Bago, is in regime hands. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) British embassy sources tell us that on Friday, April 
4, a monk held up a pro-democracy placard while another young 
man unfurled a pro-democracy flag on the sidewalk in front of 
the British embassy in Rangoon.  Within ten seconds the monk 
was grabbed by police and hustled off into custody.  The 
other young man bolted into the embassy's lobby.  The 
demonstrator is still inside as of April 7, being housed in a 
consular section interview room.  The demonstrator does not 
want to go outside, fearing (with some justification) that he 
is likely to be arrested and sentenced to seven years in 
prison.  The British embassy has been providing temporary 
sanctuary, has been in close contact with London, and has 
discussed the issue with Burmese officials. 
 
¶3. (C) Our British contacts emphasize that the young 
demonstrator inside the embassy is not affiliated with the 
NLD.  He is an ethnic Burman, is not a student, and does not 
appear to be highly educated.  His flag sported a circle 
around a fighting peacock on a red field, a general symbol of 
student resistance.  It was attached to the flagstaff upside 
down, we noted.  The young man told the British that the 
monk, whom he assumes is being interviewed by the police, 
does not know his true name.  The monk, reportedly from the 
city of Bago, also uses a pseudonym. 
 
¶4. (C) The British embassy staff did not indicate what they 
intend to do with their young guest.  Burmese MFA says this 
is the first such incident in fifteen years, and tells the 
British that they would be lenient with the young man (a 
claim the British aren't buying).  Post will review our 
policy on humanitarian sanctuary and walk-ins with the local 
guard force, MSG detachment, and other embassy staff. 
Martinez