This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 000039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
S/CT FOR REAP 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: 2002 ANNUAL TERRORISM REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 201772 
 
 
¶1. (U) Post provides the following input for the 2002 Annual 
Terrorism Report.  The information is keyed to the questions 
asked in REFTEL: 
 
 
¶A. (U) Civilian rule returned to Nigeria with the 
inauguration 
of Olusegun Obasanjo as President in May 1999.  Since his 
inauguration, President Obasanjo has pursued an active 
international agenda commensurate with Nigeria's perception 
of 
its role as a leader in both continental and world affairs. 
As 
such, Nigeria has established a balanced foreign policy that 
coincides with USG interests in many important respects. 
 
 
(U)   President Obasanjo's government was among the first to 
send condolences after the September 11 attacks.  More 
importantly, Nigeria  steadfastly and publicly lent its 
diplomatic support to Coalition efforts against the Taliban 
and 
Al Queda despite the domestic political ramifications of 
being 
home to Africa's second largest Muslim population. The GON 
backed UN Resolutions 1267, 1333 and 1368 and has initiated 
legislative and regulatory steps to shore up its anti-money 
laundering regime in order to fight terrorism. The New 
Partnership for African Development (NePAD), an organization 
founded by Obasanjo and other African Heads of State, has 
condemned terrorism and called for concrete measures to be 
taken 
by African states to combat the scourge. Nigeria is signatory 
to 
three UN counter-terrorism conventions and is reviewing other 
UN 
conventions with the view of acceding to these instruments. 
 
 
(U) Nigeria also has taken on a leading role in making 
counter- 
terrorism an important issue in West Africa, the sub-region 
where Nigeria's diplomatic and political influence is most 
pronounced. 
 
 
¶B. (U) Judiciary: There have been no known acts of terrorism 
nor 
criminal prosecutions of terrorists during the year. While 
current criminal law does not contain many specific anti- 
terrorism provisions, the penal code does proscribe acts of 
violence, which includes terrorism. Because President 
Obasanjo 
has given terrorism a high priority, the GON is moving 
quickly 
to draft improved terrorism legislation.  Likewise, the 
judiciary probably would prosecute diligently any cases of 
terrorism and would cooperate with the USG in prosecution 
despite some of the institutional shortcomings of the 
judiciary, 
i.e. understaffing, corruption, lack of equipment, large 
caseloads and inadequate pay. 
 
 
¶C. (U) Extradition: The GON did not extradite any suspected 
terrorists or request extradition of any terrorists during 
the 
year. 
 
 
¶D. (U) Possible Impediments to Prosecution/ Extradition: 
There 
are no known legal impediments to prosecution or extradition 
of 
suspected terrorists.  However, members of both the police 
force 
and the judiciary have been susceptible to corruption in the 
past. Given the high-level GON focus on counter-terrorism, it 
would be difficult for corrupt practices to impede the 
prosecution or extradition of any high-visibility terrorism 
cases. 
 
 
¶E. (U) Other Responses: The GON has enacted legislation, the 
Anti-Terrorism, Economic and Financial Crimes Commission Act, 
containing explicit criminal sanctions against both terrorism 
and terrorist financing.  Not only does the Act expressly 
prohibit terrorism; it establishes an inter-agency commission 
with the mandate to coordinate GON anti-terrorist activities. 
 
 
In view of Nigeria's importance as an oil exporter, the 
establishment of the Niger Delta Security Commission (NDSC) 
was 
aimed to protect important American and other foreign 
economic 
interests in Nigeria.  The NDSC's mission is to enhance the 
security of oil installations against possible terrorist 
attacks. While the NSDC's mandate is laudable, the 
effectiveness 
of the Commission is uncertain. 
(U) The Central Bank of Nigeria has been helpful in 
circulating 
lists of terrorist organizations.  The CBN has promised to 
confiscate terrorist assets should they be discovered.  To 
date, 
no terrorist assets have been discovered.  Unfortunately, 
institutions with responsibilities for fighting terrorist 
financing are weak. In December, under pressure from the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the GON enacted several 
new 
laws to strengthen regulatory institutions.   Although the 
threat of imminent FATF sanctions was necessary to push the 
National Assembly into action, the legislation demonstrates 
the 
GON's commitment to fighting money laundering and other 
financial crimes. 
 
 
¶F.  (U) International Fora: The GON has given clear 
diplomatic 
support in the UN and within the Economic Community of West 
African States to counter-terrorism. President Obasanjo also 
worked to include anti-terrorism as a major aspect of the New 
Partnership for African Development (NePAD). 
 
 
¶G. (U) The GON does not support international terrorism or 
terrorists. The GON clearly and repeatedly has condemned 
terrorism and followed up with concrete actions. However, 
some 
individuals and private groups in Nigeria have ties to and 
perhaps receive funding from sources in Sudan, Iran, Pakistan 
and Libya.  It is possible that some of these individuals or 
groups may have indirect links with extremist or terrorist 
organizations.  There has been one report of a Nigerian 
national 
fighting for the Taliban/Al-Qa'ida in Afghanistan. The GON 
does 
not condone any such ties to terrorist groups. 
 
 
¶H. (U) Public Statements: The GON has made no public 
statements 
supporting terrorism or any terrorist group.  All GON 
statements 
have been against terrorism. 
 
 
¶I. (U) Change in Posture: The GON has continued to be vocal 
in 
its opposition to terrorism. 
 
 
¶J. (U) Bilateral Cooperation: The Central Bank of Nigeria 
(CBN) 
responded quickly to USG requests to identify and freeze 
terrorist assets if found in Nigeria.  The CBN issued a Call 
Circular requiring all banks to identify any terrorist 
entities 
listed in Executive Order 13224.  The CBN has amended the 
list 
several times to reflect USG additions. Although no assets 
have 
been found to date, the CBN requires banks within its 
jurisdiction to continuously monitor accounts.  The CBN also 
has 
implemented stricter customer identification procedures that 
require banks to maintain sufficient information about 
customers 
and correspondent financial institutions. 
 
 
(U) By establishing the NDSC to protect oil installations 
from 
terrorist activity the GON is protecting U.S. economic and 
commercial interests. 
 
 
(U) In general, the Nigerian Police and other security forces 
have cooperated, within the limitations of their 
capabilities, 
in combating terrorism and in protecting American citizen 
residents, USG personnel and USG installations. 
 
 
¶K. (U) The U.S. Government has not sought the cooperation of 
the 
GON in the investigation or prosecution of an act of 
international terrorism in the past five years. 
 
 
¶L. (U) Prevention of Terrorism: As stated in section J, GON 
security agencies have cooperated in protecting U.S. citizens 
and interests from possible acts of terrorism.  For example, 
the 
GON has provided enhanced and ongoing security for the 
Embassy 
and its related agencies and has given high priority to 
information sharing for security purposes. 
JETER