This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ANKARA 004066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/24/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: GOT EXPRESSES DETERMINATION ON ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
 
 
REF: SECSTATE 171293 
 
 
(U) Classified by DCM Robert S. Deutsch for reasons 1.5 (b) 
and (d). 
 
 
¶1. (C) June 23 DCM delivered reftel talking points to 
Ambassador Umur Apaydin, MFA Director General for Consular 
Affairs.  Apaydin stated GOT would review USG 
trafficking-in-persons (TIP) recommendations and guide its 
work as appropriate.  Noting strong bilateral cooperation and 
thorough police investigations, Apaydin emphasized that 
recent GOT efforts to combat TIP continue to accelerate.  He 
affirmed the GOT's Anti-Trafficking-in-Persons (TIP) Task 
Force's commitment to fighting TIP remained strong and 
expressed a desire for further cooperation amongst source and 
destination countries.  Given the GOT's achievements, Apaydin 
asked for the source of contrary information on Turkey and 
sought clarification of the benchmarks laid out by G/TIP for 
the annual report.  While the GOT was "disappointed" in 
Turkey's Tier III ranking and this might be demotivating for 
some of the officials in the task force, he stated Turkey's 
commitment to expanding its anti-TIP efforts would continue. 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
A Stronger Commitment to Cooperation 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
¶2. (C)  Apaydin stated he would leave 6/24 to attend the 
Stability Pact's meeting in Bucharest as the GOT national 
coordinator for TIP.  After attending many of these meetings, 
he stated he found them to be a useful tool for learning 
about TIP and, more important, learning how Turkey fits as a 
destination country.  He emphasized the GOT's dialogue with 
all source and transit countries, including Ukraine, was a 
broad exchange of ideas and underscored that the GOT was in 
regular contact with all relevant countries.  Apaydin noted 
the GOT and IOM were in frequent communication regarding a 
wide spectrum of anti-TIP efforts, including a repatriation 
program.  Some of the USG recommendations, most notably a 
public awareness campaign aimed at end-users, he added, were 
very useful. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Apaydin pointed to an on-going investigation 
involving police officials possibly implicated in TIP as a 
success of the GOT's anti-TIP training and commitment.  He 
promised the GOT would continue to provide information on 
TIP-related investigations and prosecutions. (Note: We will 
follow up on the investigation of possible police corruption. 
 End note.) 
 
 
--------------------------------- 
A Desire for Better Understanding 
--------------------------------- 
 
 
¶4. (C) Apaydin raised the issue that many TIP experts vary on 
which steps are the most important: some emphasize 
legislative steps, such as outlawing "bogus" marriages, while 
others stress victim programs.  He noted that while the GOT 
has endeavored to meet all aspects of TIP, expanded 
cooperation would help reconcile discrepancies amongst 
information.  Within this context, Apaydin requested the USG 
to cite sources on negative information in order for the GOT 
to be able fully to investigate and determine whether or how 
their programs might be misfiring.  We pressed Apaydin for 
better collection of statistics as well as anecdotal evidence 
that would clarify the picture on TIP prevention, protection, 
and prosecution in Turkey. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) While our approach elicited a useful discussion about 
the USG recommendations, the steps provided in reftel do not 
represent clear, objective benchmarks - benchmarks that are 
necessary to provide appropriate guidance to the GOT on what 
steps are required for Tier II.  Apaydin noted, "While the 
USG report allows TIP to remain at the forefront of 
government objectives, it is frustrating to implement many 
anti-TIP steps only to be told later they are not 
sufficient."  If we cannot set and maintain clear goalposts, 
this process will prove counterproductive to our ability to 
enhance cooperation against Trafficking-in-Persons and to 
other interests and objectives in Turkey. 
PEARSON