This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T AMMAN 002467 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR DAUFHAUSER/BFOX/BMURDEN/JZARATE/PASHIN 
NSC FOR JMYERS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/23/2008 
TAGS: EFIN ETTC JO IZ UNSC
SUBJECT: TFIZ01:TRACKING IRAQI ASSETS IN JORDAN 
 
REF: A. STATE 98752 
     ¶B. AMMAN 1914 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (s)  The GOJ has agreed to receive a small team of U.S. 
Treasury experts.  Prime Minister Ali Abu Ragheb told the 
Ambassador on April 23 that Central Bank Governor Umayya 
Toukan would cooperate and work closely with the team to the 
extent consistent with Jordanian law.  Abu Ragheb stressed 
that the visit would have to be very discreet and that there 
could be no publicity inside or outside of Jordan. 
 
¶2.  (s)  Adding that he had consulted with Toukan (ECON/C had 
previously passed the contents of the request to Toukan), Abu 
Ragheb said there were portions of our request that they 
could certainly support.  He thought, however, that it might 
not be possible to satisfy all of the expectations in reftel. 
 In particular, the types of action against Iraqi front 
companies suggested in reftel might pose domestic legal 
complications.  Interviews with non-GOJ officials might also 
be difficult to arrange.  Nonetheless, Toukan and his 
associates would be ready to discuss these issues with the 
team. 
 
¶3.  (s)  The embassy is likewise ready to work with a 
Treasury team.  Please advise on expected arrival dates via a 
country clearance request.  This request should also provide 
security level information for team members and fiscal data 
to cover the team's expenses (e.g., transportation, mobile 
phones).  We can provide temporary office space to accomodate 
2-3 people in the economic section.  The Jordanian workweek 
is Sunday-Thursday.  Please note that Sunday, April 27 is the 
local Easter holiday during which Jordanian offices and the 
embassy will be closed. 
GNEHM