This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 GUATEMALA 000605 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, WHA/PPC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB GT
SUBJECT: ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT--GUATEMALA 
 
REF: STATE 22225 
 
¶1.  (U) The following are responses to questions in Ref A. 
Additional information on Embassy projects and strategies to 
combat trafficking can be found in Ref B. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Country Overview: 
 
¶A.  Is the country a country of origin, transit or 
destination for international trafficked men, women or 
children?  Are there any estimates of numbers of victims? 
Are certain groups more at risk of being trafficked?  What is 
the source of information? 
 
-- According to reports by the International Organization on 
Migration (IOM), Casa Alianza, and an October 2002 report 
from the DePaul University International Human Rights Law 
Institute, Guatemala is a country of origin and transit for 
international trafficking of persons and, in some instances, 
is also a destination.  The trafficking is by land, air, and 
sea, and it does occur within Guatemala,s borders.  Reliable 
statistics do not exist on the magnitude of the problem. 
Other than Guatemalans, other Central and Latin Americans 
(notably Ecuadorians) are also being trafficked.  Victims 
trafficked to Guatemala are usually young women or children 
who are often brought in for sexual exploitation.  Those 
trafficked from Guatemala for sexual exploitation are usually 
minors, both boys and girls, from poor families.  Trafficking 
is intimately related to international migration issues, as 
the promise of arrival in the U.S. is often used to attract 
desperate Latin Americans. 
 
¶B.  Where are the persons trafficked from?  Where are the 
persons trafficked to? 
 
-- Trafficked persons come mainly from other Central American 
countries and Ecuador.  Most are destined for the United 
States or Mexico.  Some are destined for Guatemala.  In 
addition to the trafficking of Latin Americans, smuggling of 
Chinese, Afghans, Egyptians, Pakistanis and Syrians has been 
noted in the past, and probably includes some cases of 
trafficking. 
 
¶C.  Have there been any changes in the direction or extent of 
trafficking? 
 
-- Not to Embassy's knowledge.  Trafficking may have been 
affected by a general slowdown in illegal migration into 
Mexico after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the 
U.S., economic decline in the U.S., and Mexican efforts to 
prevent illegal entry from Guatemala.  Press reported that 
Mexico deported 120,000 Central Americans from Chiapas state 
in 2002. 
 
¶D.  Are any efforts or surveys planned or under way to 
document the extent and nature of trafficking in the country? 
 Is any additional information available from such reports or 
surveys that was not available last year? 
 
-- The July 2001 National Plan of Action to Combat Sexual 
Exploitation of Minors included the goal of developing more 
information on this problem related to trafficking.  To date 
no survey or report has been produced, however.  The IOM in 
2002 published results of a survey profiling the composition 
of Guatemalan migrants, 92% of whom were destined for the 
U.S.  It also features data on where come from, where they 
settle in the U.S., remittances to Guatemala, and age and 
social data.  IOM also produced a report on Sexual 
Exploitation of children and adolescents in Guatemala in 
cooperation with ECPAT International and Casa Alianza. 
 
¶E.  If the country is a destination point for trafficked 
victims:  What kinds of conditions are the victims trafficked 
into? Are they forced to work in sweatshops, agriculture, 
restaurants, construction sites, prostitution, nude dancing, 
domestic servitude, begging, or other forms of labor or 
services? What methods are used to ensure their compliance? 
Are the victims subject to violence, threats, withholding of 
their documents, debt bondage, etc.? 
 
-- Conditions are pitiful.  Victims are subject to violence 
and threat, but lack funds to return to their home countries. 
 Victims are often young women or children, brought here for 
sexual exploitation and paid low salaries.  A study done by 
the NGO "Pro Nino y Nina Centroamericanos" (PRONICE) in 1999 
suggests that fraud and threats are common forms of 
recruitment.  Usually traffickers choose pretty girls from 
poor families, and the most common "contracting places" are 
along the borders. Asians, primarily Chinese, have also been 
brought to Guatemala, though they are mainly being smuggled. 
Those brought in have had to pay exorbitant rates for the 
voyage and for false documents. 
 
¶F.  For countries of origin:  Which populations are targeted 
by the traffickers?  Who are the traffickers?  What methods 
are used to target the victims?  (Are they offered lucrative 
jobs, sold by their families, approached by friends of 
friends?)  What methods are used to move the victims (e.g., 
are false documents being used?)? 
 
-- Sources in Guatemalan immigration indicate that victims 
trafficked from Guatemala are generally poor people looking 
for a better life for themselves and their families.  The 
traffickers quite often approach these individuals and offer 
them jobs that would allow them to make regular remittances 
back to the family in Guatemala.  The main target population 
for sexual exploitation is minors, both boys and girls, from 
poor families or orphans.  The methods of approach include 
promises of economic rewards, jobs in cafeterias or beauty 
parlors, or jobs in other countries.  The means of promotion 
include flyers, newspaper advertisements, and verbal/personal 
recommendations.  The DePaul University study "In Modern 
Bondage: Sex Trafficking in the Americas" cites evidence of 
the following principal forms and agents of trafficking in 
Guatemala:  1) "deceptions/false promise of employment" by 
recruiters, intermediaries, and bar/brothel owners; 2) 
"misadventure" with alien smugglers and truck drivers; 3) 
abduction by common criminals; and, 4) "peer-influenced" 
(primarily domestic) trafficking by friends and adolescents. 
 
¶G.  Is there political will at the highest levels of 
government to combat trafficking in persons? Is the 
government making a good faith effort to seriously address 
trafficking?  Is there a willingness to take action against 
government officials linked to it?  In broad terms, what 
resources is the host government devoting to combat 
trafficking in persons (in terms of prevention, protection, 
prosecution)? 
 
-- The Attorney General's Office is currently investigating 
allegations of abetting illegal migration against the 
director of Migration and other immigration employees for 
possible alien smuggling.  A former director was replaced 
after similar charges surfaced.  Neither has yet been charged 
with a crime. 
 
-- The GOG has shown some will to combat trafficking, but 
much remains to be done.  To combat both smuggling and 
trafficking, an ambitious plan was designed by the Central 
American Commission of Migration Directors.  The plan aims to 
address the problem of migration, and it includes assistance 
to Guatemalans in foreign nations, assistance to Guatemalan 
victims who return, reinsertion into society, local 
development to diminish migration problems, protection of 
human rights of immigrants, and educational and informational 
campaigns.  The new agreement was signed in March 2001.  In 
July 2001, the Cabinet approved a Plan of Action against 
Sexual Exploitation of Minors and Adolescents.  The Ministry 
of Foreign Relations also announced a special commission to 
advise the President on the general issue of migration, and 
has engaged in regular dialogue with Mexico on migration 
enforcement issues. 
 
-- On enforcement, the GOG is using the immigration service 
and the national police force to combat trafficking and has 
had some victories.  A new computerized entry and exit system 
has yielded some positive results with respect to combating 
alien smuggling and should help fight trafficking as well. 
However, no statistics exist for cases involving trafficking 
per se.  Most deportations were of Ecuadorians in transit to 
the U.S. who were probably victims of smuggling, rather than 
of trafficking. 
 
¶H.  Do governmental authorities or individual members 
of government forces facilitate trafficking, condone 
trafficking, or are otherwise complicit in such activities? 
If so, at what levels? Do government authorities (such as 
customs, border guards, immigration officials, local police, 
or others) receive bribes from traffickers or otherwise 
assist in their operation?  What punitive measures, if any, 
have been taken against those individuals complicit or 
involved in trafficking?  Please provide numbers when 
available, of government officials involved, accused, 
convicted and/or prosecuted. 
 
-- The involvement of government officials in trafficking has 
not been documented.  However, credible press accounts allege 
that corruption in the Guatemalan immigration service is 
widespread and involves the acceptance of bribes to allow 
individuals and groups to enter the country without proper 
documentation.  Embassy believes some of this corrupt 
activity involves cases meeting the definition of trafficking 
in persons. 
 
-- No immigration officials have yet been prosecuted under a 
2000 law against alien smuggling. 
 
¶I.  What are the limitations on the government's ability to 
address this problem in practice?  E.g., is funding for 
police or other institutions inadequate? Is overall 
corruption a problem? Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
 
-- Lack of resources, both manpower and money, is a major 
limitation on combating this problem, as with 
narco-trafficking and other trans-border problems.  With 
unlimited crying needs and acute politically charged demands 
on scarce resources, providing important resources to combat 
trafficking is very difficult.  There is also the problem of 
overall corruption that is pervasive throughout the GOG. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Prevention: 
 
¶A.  Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in that country? If no, why not? 
 
-- In bilateral discussions about Migration Issues with 
Mexico since 1996, the GOG has publicly acknowledged the need 
to strengthen its efforts to combat the trafficking of 
migrants.  The GOG has also acknowledged a related problem, 
the sexual exploitation of minors.  In July 2001, the Cabinet 
approved a National Plan of Action Against the Sexual and 
Commercial Exploitation of Children and Adolescents in 
Guatemala.  The Plan's strategic objectives include:  1) 
survey social, economic, political, and social conditions 
contributing to the problem, 2) assist and rehabilitate 
victims, 3) apply justice and eliminate corruption 
facilitating exploitation, and 4) increase awareness of the 
problem and advance the plan.  The Presidential Secretariat 
for Social Welfare developed the plan in cooperation with 
other government agencies. 
 
-- The Director General of Guatemalan Migration has 
acknowledged that trafficking in persons is a problem.  The 
government does not have statistics, but every day Mexican 
authorities deport approximately 400 people from Central and 
South America through the border at El Carmen.  Many of these 
people claim they had been taken with the promise that they 
would be able to enter the U.S.  In Mexico, they are either 
obligated to work with no pay or else they are prostituted. 
Most of these people are probably victims of alien smuggling 
rather than trafficking. 
 
¶B. Which government agencies are involved in anti-trafficking 
efforts? 
 
--The following government agencies are involved in the 
anti-trafficking efforts:  The Director General of Migration, 
Immigration Defense from the Office of the Ombudsman, 
Ministry of Foreign Relations, Presidential Secretariat of 
Social Welfare, National Civilian Police, Labor Ministry, 
Public Ministry, and the judiciary. 
 
¶C.  Are there or have there been anti-trafficking information 
or education campaigns? If yes, briefly explain the 
campaign(s), including their objectives and effectiveness. 
 
-- In December and January (2000-2001) the Embassy Public 
Affairs Office, with $40,000 from INS, had three radio ads 
and three television ads produced.  The ads ran heavily 
during these two months, which INS had described as a high 
traffic period.  In June 2000, Public Affairs sponsored 
visits by two Guatemalan journalists on an INS "border tour" 
to report on the dangers of trusting alien smugglers 
("coyotes").  A 10-day training program for four radio 
journalists from the border province of Huehuetenango in 
January 2002 had a similar emphasis.  The journalists have 
helped to spread Embassy's message discouraging travel with 
smugglers. 
 
¶D.  Does the government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking? (E.g., To promote women's participation in 
economic decision-making or efforts to keep children in 
school).  Please explain. 
 
-- The Human Rights Ombudsman's office maintains an Office in 
Defense of Displaced and Migrant Populations which 
investigates cases of trafficking.  They investigated one 
case in 2002 involving possible trafficking of a Salvadoran 
children, but determined that the children had parental 
permission and were not victims of trafficking.  The 
Ombudsman's Office also sponsored public information 
campaigns during 2002 warning intending migrants of the risks 
of illegal immigration and trafficking.  Other governmental 
offices are dedicated to the Defense of Indigenous Women, 
which provides legal advice to indigenous women victims of 
domestic violence and abuse, Children's Rights, and Women's 
issues, but none reported involvement in cases of trafficking 
during the period of this report.  The GOG's Presidential 
Secretariat of Social Welfare coordinated GOG cooperation 
 
SIPDIS 
with civil society groups including religious, private, and 
international NGOs under the National Plan of Action to 
Combat Sexual Exploitation of Minors. 
 
¶E.  Is the Government able to support prevention programs? 
 
-- Government resources are severely strained and inadequate 
in many areas, including combating trafficking. 
 
¶F.  What is the relationship between government officials, 
NGOs, other relevant organizations and other elements in 
civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
-- Many NGOs are working on gathering information, providing 
assistance, and preventing trafficking.  There are NGOs 
working at the Guatemala-Mexico border, and human rights 
organizations working with women, children, and migrants. 
The government has provided some space for cooperative 
programs through the immigration offices and the Office of 
the Ombudsman. 
 
¶G.  Does the government adequately monitor its borders? Does 
it monitor immigration and emigration patterns for evidence 
of trafficking? Do law enforcement agencies respond 
appropriately to such evidence? 
 
-- Guatemala,s borders are poorly policed and corruption is 
rampant along both sides.  The computerized entry-exit system 
is helping at the legal crossing points, but there are many 
illegal crossing points available.  Mexico deported 120,000 
Central Americans from Chiapas in 2002.  Central American 
deportees from Mexico are transported by USG-funded bus 
service to the borders of El Salvador and Honduras under a 
cooperative program between U.S., Mexican and Guatemalan 
immigration authorities.  According to the local press, the 
main deterrent to the flow of migrants is the poor treatment 
of people who are detained in Mexico. 
 
¶H.  Is there a mechanism for communication and coordination 
between various agencies, such as a multi-agency working 
group or a task force? Does the government have an 
anti-trafficking in persons task force? Does the government 
have a public corruption task force? 
 
-- In order to provide a common forum for migration issues, 
the National Association for Guatemalan Migrants has been 
created.  This and other groups work together on human rights 
issues with the Presidential Coordinator of Human Rights in 
Guatemala.  Since April 2000 the government formed a 
prosecutor's office for investigation and prosecution of 
public corruption cases. 
 
-- In 2002 President Portillo named a new Anti-Corruption 
Commission to implement a government initiative consisting of 
corruption prevention, control, and sanctions.  Prevention 
efforts will include efforts at professionalization of the 
public service, reducing discretion, improving access to 
information on public spending, and financial reform 
legislation.  Control efforts will include improved internal 
regulations, full implementation of financial administrative 
systems, modernization of the Office of the Comptroller 
General of Accounts, and greater citizen participation in 
monitoring public spending.  Sanctions efforts are intended 
to end impunity within and outside the government. 
 
¶I.  Does the government coordinate with or participate in 
multinational or international working groups or efforts to 
prevent, monitor, or control trafficking? 
 
-- Yes.  The Regional Commission of Central American 
Migration Directors meets regularly to discuss issues 
including trafficking.  The International Migration 
Organization (IOM) has a regional office in Guatemala, and 
cooperates with the government on several bilateral projects 
to combat trafficking.  Guatemala is a member of the 
11-member Regional Conference on Migration, and hosted a 
meeting of the Conference in March 2002. 
 
¶J.  Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons? If so, which agencies are 
involved in developing it? Were NGOs consulted in the 
process? What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
the action plan? 
 
-- No, but it does have a National Action Plan to Combat the 
Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents, as explained 
above. 
 
¶K.  Is there some entity or person responsible for developing 
anti-trafficking programs within the government? 
 
-- No, but this task falls under the general responsibilities 
of the Director of Migration under the Interior Ministry. 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is also committed to 
addressing the problem. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers: 
 
¶A.  Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons? If so, what is the law? If not, under 
what laws can traffickers be prosecuted?  For example, are 
there laws against slavery or the exploitation of 
prostitution by means of coercion or fraud? Are there laws 
being used in trafficking cases? Are these laws, taken 
together, adequate to cover the full scope of trafficking in 
persons? 
 
-- Guatemala has several laws that specifically prohibit the 
trafficking and smuggling of persons, including the Law of 
Immigration of 1998 (Legislative Decree 95-98), Article 194 
of the Criminal Code, and several articles of the migration 
code.  In addition, there are other laws in the penal code 
that could be applicable. Guatemala has signed several 
international declarations regarding slavery.  The penal code 
also regulates coercion and the sexual abuse of women against 
their will. 
 
¶B.  What is the penalty for traffickers? 
 
-- The penalty for traffickers is 1-3 years in prison, plus a 
fine of 2,500-15,000 quetzals ($320-1,923 at current exchange 
rates).  Penalties are increased by 2/3 if the victim is 
under 12, if the act was done with the intention to make a 
profit, or if the act included use of deceit, violence or 
abuse of authority. 
¶C.  What are the penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault? How do they compare to the penalty for trafficking? 
 
-- The penalty for rape is 6-20 years, and the penalty for 
forcible assault is 2-5 years. The penalties for trafficking 
are less severe and it is easy for traffickers and smugglers 
to buy their way out by paying a prosecutor or judge. 
¶D.  Has the government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers? If yes, provide number of arrests, indictments, 
plea bargains, fines and convictions.  What were the 
penalties actually imposed in each case?  Are the traffickers 
serving the time sentenced?  If not, why not?  Please 
indicate whether the government can provide this information, 
and if not, why not. 
 
-- According to the DePaul Univ. report, "immigration and 
police have increased arrests for smuggling, but further 
identification of trafficking cases is not done."  A possible 
exception to this statement are cases against illegal 
adoption, or baby trafficking.  In February 2003, four 
persons were reportedly arrested and accused of trafficking 
in persons in two separate cases.  However, to date, we know 
of no convictions. 
 
¶E.  Is there any information or reports of who is behind the 
trafficking? 
 
-- There have been rumors that in cases involving the illegal 
adoption of minors, both lawyers and notaries are directly 
involved.  The Embassy believes that in some cases these 
rumors are true. 
 
¶F.  Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking? Does the government use active investigative 
techniques in trafficking in persons investigations? To the 
extent possible under domestic law, are techniques such as 
electronic surveillance, undercover operations, and mitigated 
punishment or immunity for cooperating suspects used by the 
government?  Does the criminal procedure code prohibit the 
police from engaging in covert operations? 
 
-- The GOG will investigate cases of trafficking, but the 
victims usually do not press charges.  Usually, the victims 
of these crimes are women or minors, poor, and uneducated. 
Access to the justice system for these people, while 
improving, is still low.  One problem with criminal justice 
in Guatemala is that the adversarial system is very new.  In 
addition, lack of resources, and lack of training limit the 
ability of the National Civilian Police and the prosecutors 
to perform investigations.  Undercover agents are not allowed 
under current law, and the surveillance of communications was 
declared unconstitutional.  This makes investigations of 
trafficking organizations more difficult. 
 
¶G.  Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in how to investigate and prosecute 
incidences of trafficking? 
 
--No, the GOG does not provide specialized training for 
government officials in investigating incidents of 
trafficking. 
 
¶H.  Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases? If 
possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
international investigations of trafficking? 
 
-- In order to cooperate with the governments of other 
countries, the GOG and most neighboring countries have signed 
mutual legal assistance agreements.  In theory, this should 
facilitate cooperation between countries in carrying out 
investigations. 
 
¶I.  Does the government extradite persons who are 
charged with trafficking in other countries? If so, can post 
provide the number of traffickers extradited? Does the 
government extradite its own nationals charges with such 
offenses? If not, is the government prohibited by law from 
extraditing its own nationals? If so, what is the government 
doing to modify its laws to permit the extradition of 
nationals? 
 
-- Extradition, including the extradition of Guatemalan 
nationals, is allowed under the Guatemalan Constitution and 
in various treaties and conventions.  We are unaware, 
however, of any extradition requests for trafficking in 
persons. 
 
¶J.  Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If yes, please explain in detail. 
 
-- There is no evidence to suggest that the Guatemalan 
Government is involved in trafficking.  There are allegations 
of individual corruption by government officials in relation 
to orphan adoptions.  The United States and Canada have 
instituted strong controls to decrease the possibility that 
orphans go to those countries against the true desires of 
their biological mothers.  There are several initiatives 
within the Government of Guatemala, UNICEF, NGOs, and the 
U.S. Embassy to reduce further the possibility of fraud and 
coercion in international adoptions.  Most notably, on March 
4, 2003, the Guatemalan Congress ratified the Hague 
Convention on International Adoption. 
 
¶K.  If government officials are involved in trafficking, what 
steps has the government taken to end their participation? 
Have any government officials been prosecuted for involvement 
in trafficking or trafficking related corruption? Have any 
been convicted?  What actual sentence was imposed?  Please 
provide specific numbers, when available. 
 
-- The GOG has attempted to curb large-scale corruption and 
collusion with prostitution rings along its western border 
with Mexico by rotating police there every three months. 
 
¶L.  Has the government signed and ratified the following 
international instruments? Please provide the date of 
signature if appropriate. 
 
-- The ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for elimination of the worst forms of child 
labor was approved and ratified on August 21, 2001, and the 
instrument of ratification was deposited on October 5, 2001. 
It entered into effect internationally for Guatemala on 
October 11, 2002. 
 
-- The "Sale of Children Protocol" supplementing the rights 
of the child convention, was approved by decree 76-2001 of 
the Congress of Guatemala on December 11, 2001. 
 
-- The "Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, Especially Women and Children," supplementing the 
UN convention against transnational crime, is currently in 
the process of being reviewed by GOG agencies and 
institutions. 
 
-- Guatemala signed (September 7, 2000) and ratified (April 
30, 2002) the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution and Child Pornography. 
 
-- Guatemala ratified the Hague Convention On Protection of 
the Child and Cooperation in International Adoption on March 
4, 2003. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Protection and Assistance to Victims: 
 
¶A.  Does the government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If yes, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care facilities? 
If so, can post provide the number of victims placed in these 
care facilities? 
 
-- The government has announced plans to construct shelters 
for deportees along the Guatemala-Mexico border, but those 
shelters are not functioning.  The Public Ministry assists 
victims of crime through offices in all provincial capitals 
and major cities.  Assistance to victims of sexual assaults 
consists of medical, psychological, and social counseling and 
assistance.  The Criminal Investigative Division of the 
National Police also provides referral services to victims, 
and investigates sex crimes that may involve trafficking.  In 
2002, the USG provided support totaling $110,000 to the NGO 
"Casa de la Mujer" for occupational training to trafficked 
women along the Mexican-Guatemalan border. 
 
¶B.  Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? 
Please explain. 
 
-- We are not aware of GOG funding to foreign or domestic 
NGOs for services to victims. 
 
¶C.  Are the rights of victims respected, or are they also 
treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, fined or 
deported?  If detained or jailed, for how long? Are victims 
prosecuted for violations of other laws, such as those 
governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
-- Undocumented foreigners are deported and given 72 hours to 
depart, but many stay in Guatemala.  Victims of trafficking 
are not prosecuted. 
 
¶D.  Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May victims 
file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victim's access to such 
legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against a former employee, is the victim permitted to 
obtain other employment or to leave the country?  Is there a 
victim restitution program? 
 
-- Victims are not actively encouraged to file civil suits or 
to seek legal action against traffickers.  However, they are 
free to do so. 
 
¶E.  What kind of protection is the government able to provide 
for the victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice? 
 
-- If witnesses choose to come forward, the government does 
not normally provide any protection for them.  However, in 
exceptional cases involving threats against witnesses, the 
Public Ministry provides police protection during and for a 
period after trials. 
 
¶F.  Does the government provide any specialized training for 
government officials in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, including the special needs of trafficked 
children? Does the government provide training on protections 
and assistance to its embassies and consulates in foreign 
countries that are destination or transit countries? Does it 
urge those embassies and consulates to develop ongoing 
relationships with NGOs that serve trafficked victims? 
 
-- The government provides specialized training for police 
and Public Ministry officials serving victims. Training for 
embassies and consulates in foreign countries is also being 
contemplated, but is not yet in place.  The GOG does not 
prohibit its embassies and consulates from developing ongoing 
relationships with NGOs that serve trafficked victims. 
 
¶G.  Does the government provide assistance, such 
as medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its 
repatriated nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
-- The Public Ministry, with assistance from USAID, opened 
pilot victims' assistance centers in the capital in 2000 and 
expanded the program to include all provincial capitals and 
major cities in 2001.  The centers are staffed by a social 
worker training in victim assistance, with access to medical 
care, rape test kits, evidence preservation, and follow-up 
legal and psychological counseling.  The centers are 
available to victims of trafficking as well as other crimes. 
The Criminal Investigative Division of the National Police 
also provides services to victims and investigates crimes of 
trafficking. 
¶H.  Which NGOs, if any, work with trafficking victims? What 
types of services do they provide? What sort of cooperation 
do they receive from local authorities? 
 
-- The major NGOs that work with trafficking victims are 
"Pastoral del Migrante" from the Catholic Archbishop's 
office, "Casa Del Migrante" in Tecun Uman and "Casa Alianza" 
in the capital.  Studies about trafficking are being carried 
out in Tecun Uman by Guatemalan think tanks including FLACSO 
and AVANSCO and the University of San Carlos.  The NGOs 
provide shelter and medical and legal assistance. 
 
Embassy point of contact for trafficking in persons is PolOff 
Erik Hall.  He can be reached at (502) 331-1541, ext. 4635, 
and by fax at (502) 334-8474. 
HAMILTON