This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 001832 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARN, NEA/PA, NEA/AIA, INR/NESA, R/MR, 
I/GNEA, B/BXN, B/BRN, NEA/PPD, NEA/IPA FOR ALTERMAN 
USAID/ANE/MEA 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH 
PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: KMDR JO
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION ON WAR ON IRAQ 
 
                         Summary 
 
-- Jordan's daily papers today, March 26, are dominated 
by a lead story highlighting Jordan's categorical 
rejection of Iraqi charges that Jordan was blocking trade 
and responsible for a disruption in the oil supply 
between the two countries.  In press conferences held by 
the Minister of Information, the Minister of Industry and 
Trade and by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Jordan's 
senior leadership responded strongly to the Iraqi 
accusations, describing them as "unwarranted and 
irresponsible".  Other lead stories continue to focus on 
developments in the war on Iraq 
 
                  Editorial Commentary 
 
-- "The injustice of our kinfolk" 
 
Center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour (03/26) 
editorializes:  "Yesterday was a sad day for us in Jordan 
as we saw Iraqi officials fall in the trap of the 
psychological war that is being launched and set up by 
those who are upset by Jordan's firm nationalistic stand 
towards Iraq.  Those officials started to believe rumors 
and accepted to be part of the skepticism that is 
targeted against Iraq's morale.  They forgot how much 
Jordan suffered for the sake of their cause over the past 
two decades." 
 
-- "Jordan and Iraq, one fate" 
 
Daily columnist Bater Wardam writes on the op-ed page of 
center-left, influential Arabic daily Al-Dustour (03/26): 
"We do not need to defend Jordan, because its track 
record is sufficient to speak in defense of itself.  The 
Jordanian leadership and people have always been real in 
their support for Iraq in times of crisis." 
 
-- "Shock and awe" 
 
Daily columnist Fahd Fanek writes on the back page of 
semi-official, influential Arabic daily Al-Rai (03/26): 
"The political and military planning for the war was 
based on the idea that the war would be quick and fast, 
whereby Iraqi cities would fall one after the other, but 
no one thought that Umm Qasr would be difficult to 
overcome.  The aggressors expected that the Iraqi people 
would welcome them with open arms as the liberators and 
not as occupiers, but the Iraqi people knew them for who 
they really are.  The current war is not equal, for there 
is a clear technological superiority on the American 
side.  Yet, America suffers from a deficiency in will 
power, legitimacy and morality.  The Iraqi citizens are 
fighting hard in defense of their land and their dignity. 
Why would the American soldiers fight so that American 
companies can take over the oil, and so Israel's military 
superiority is entrenched and strengthened?" 
GNEHM