This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L GUATEMALA 000784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/25/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL CU GT UNHRC
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA RESPONSE TO CUBAN CRACKDOWN AGAINST 
OPPOSITION 
 
REF: A. STATE 75175 
 
     ¶B. GUATEMALA 770 
 
Classified By: PolCouns David Lindwall for reason 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) In a March 22 meeting with President Alfonso Portillo, 
the Ambassador raised USG concerns (Ref A) over the Cuban 
crackdown against the opposition.  As noted in Ref B, 
Portillo acknowledged that the arrests carried out by the 
Cuban Government were worrisome, but stopped short of 
committing the GOG to issuing a public statement condemning 
the arrests. 
 
¶2. (C) The Ambassador raised the matter again with Vice 
President Francisco Reyes Lopez on March 25, noting that 
failure by the international community to condemn these 
arrests would undermine those who are trying to bring about 
peaceful democratic change in Cuba.  The Ambassador added 
that the dissidents, who were simply exercising rights that 
all other inhabitants of the hemisphere have, look to the UN 
Commission on Human Rights as a forum where the international 
community calls on the Cuban Government to respect their 
basic human rights.  Failure by Guatemala to vote for a 
resolution calling on the Cuban Government to respect basic 
human rights, especially in view of the recent wave of 
arrests, would be a severe blow to these individuals who are 
paying for their defense of human rights with incarceration. 
The Ambassador asked the Vice President what arguments 
opponents of this resolution could possibly have to oppose a 
call on the Cuban Government to respect basic human rights. 
Vice President Reyes dodged the question and blamed "the 
Congress" for opposition to Guatemala voting with us in favor 
of a Cuba resolution.  He said, however, that no decision had 
been made regarding the vote, and did not rule out that the 
recent wave of arrests would be weighed at the moment 
Guatemala decided on its vote. 
 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador was to deliver the talking points to 
Foreign Minister Gutierrez on March 25, but the Foreign 
Minister canceled the meeting due to illness.  In his stead, 
the Ambassador spoke with Vice Foreign Minister Jorge Perez 
and raised the same concerns.  Perez promised to relay our 
views to the Foreign Minister and inform us of any response. 
 
¶4. (C) PolCouns met with MFA Director of Multilateral Affairs 
Giovanni Castillo on March 25 to deliver Ref A demarche and 
talking points.  Castillo said the GOG was aware of the 
arrest of dissidents by the Cuban regime, and said he would 
forward to the Foreign Minister our request for the GOG to 
make a public statement in support of the dissidents.  He 
asked if other countries in the hemisphere had made 
statements.  Castillo said he would inform us of any decision 
by the GOG in this regard. 
HAMILTON