This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 002118 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION SPECIAL, MAY 19: TERRORIST 
ATTACKS IN SAUDI ARABIA AND MOROCCO 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Leading Kuwaiti liberals take to the op/ed pages 
to condemn recent terror attacks in the region and link them 
to Arab world failure to address the political, social and 
economic conditions that "breed" Islamic terror. Noticeably 
absent is any tendency to blame the US/Israel/the West for 
this phenomenon. According to writers, steps Arab 
governments must take include eliminating sources of finance 
for terrorists and revising educational curricula that 
incite sectarian hatred and violence. END SUMMARY. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶2.  "When Terrorism Knocks the Doors" 
Liberal Editor-in-Chief Waleed Al-Nesf wrote in independent 
Al-Qabas (5/18): "The recent terrorist attacks in Saudi 
Arabia and Morocco stressed to us that danger can reach all 
of us. We in Kuwait must be more determined to end terrorism 
within the framework of the law. Our strategy to combat 
terrorism must be to save young men from believing in 
extremism, to learn to be tolerant with others and to 
eliminate the sources of finance for terrorists. We must 
unite with other nations, adopt new means to eliminate 
terrorism and to contribute to implementing new policies to 
combat terrorism." 
 
¶3.  "It Is In Our Hands, Not In Bush's Hands" 
Editor-in-Chief Jassim Boodai wrote in independent Al-Rai Al- 
Aam (5/18): "Unfortunately, some of us have helped in the 
development of [terrorism] but then handed over the problem 
of combating terrorism to the Americans instead of taking 
care of it themselves. Therefore, combating terrorism should 
be in our hands, not in Bush's hands. [I]f we fail as 
nations and a society to take the matter into our own hands, 
then we deserve to live in fear." 
 
¶4.  "The New Terrorism" 
Liberal Kuwait University Political Science Professor, Dr. 
Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (5/18): 
"Are Arab countries, and the GCC in particular, ready to 
combat terrorism? Until now, most Arab nations have focused 
on the security aspect in confronting terrorism but have 
ignored the economic, social and the political facets. We 
are certain that none of these countries are unilaterally 
capable of confronting terrorism without the assistance of 
other Western nations." 
 
¶5.   "Those Who Brainwash Minds" 
Liberal Media Advisor to the Acting Prime Minister, Sami Al- 
Nesf wrote in independent Al-Anba (5/18):  "Terrorism and 
suicide attacks are the result of a long accumulation of 
instigations. There are only three solutions to ending 
terrorism and violence: 1) Becoming tougher with the people 
who instigate such actions; 2) Revising the educational 
curricula that call for hatred; and 3) Holding awareness and 
enlightenment programs for the Arab societies." 
 
¶6.  "America Is Our Friend and Ally" 
Pan-Arabist Editor-in-Chief Ahmad Al-Jarallah wrote in 
independent Al-Seyassah (5/18): "Currently, we have a golden 
opportunity to fight terror by openly declaring our alliance 
with the world's superpower, which was also severely hit by 
terror. We have this opportunity, but we hesitate to seize 
it just because we want to sympathize with local and Arab 
opinions, which are anti-American. Kuwait might have 
considered the presence of American forces on our territory 
as an occupation, before the occupation by Iraq. However, 
after Saddam`s army invaded Kuwait in 1990. all Kuwaitis, 
including the political leadership, were then ready to 
cooperate with Washington for the liberation of Kuwait. [W]e 
should openly declare Americans to be our friends and 
allies." 
 
¶7.  "Our Hearts Are With The Saudi Kingdom" 
Liberal Secretary General of the Kuwait Journalists' 
Association, Faisal Al-Qannai wrote in independent Al- 
Seyassah (5/17): "The terrorist attack in the city of Riyadh 
bears resemblance to the bombings in the US on September 11 
[2001] and undoubtedly proves that the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia is also a target of terrorist acts carried out by Al- 
Qaeda. Gulf countries must do their utmost to take the 
preventive measures needed to provide protection and 
security not only for foreigners residing in the GCC 
countries, but also for all public places. Terrorism does 
not differentiate between religions and nationalities, given 
that many Muslims and Arabs fell victim in the Riyadh 
bombing." 
 
 
JONES