This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 001164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV, EB 
COMMERCE FOR ITA JEAN KELLY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA JEFF NEIL 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2013 
TAGS: EFIN ECON BM
SUBJECT: BURMA'S PRIVATE BANKS FACE FINAL ORDEAL TO RESUME 
OPERATIONS 
 
REF: RANGOON 846 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN MARTINEZ FOR REASONS 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The Burmese government seems poised to allow 
private banks to resume operations if they meet seven 
financial conditions.  The government has severely limited 
private banking operations since a run and subsequent crash 
in February.  Even without the authorities' blessing, many 
smaller private banks have already re-opened for business. 
Sadly, we don't see the government's "resolution" of this 
eight-month-old crisis including the reforms necessary to 
rebuild a discredited, eviscerated private banking system. 
End summary. 
 
Rule of Sevens 
 
¶2. (C) According to banking sources, the GOB has made a 
decision to "resolve" the banking crisis in October.  Though 
nothing has been released formally, apparently the Finance 
Ministry has informed private bankers via the Bank Management 
Committee -- the committee formed to ride herd on disgraced 
private bankers following the private banking system's 
collapse in February. 
 
¶3. (C) Details are still sketchy, but according to the 
"resolution" plan, as of October 1 private banks will be 
expected to meet seven conditions.  Banks that do not meet 
all seven will not be allowed to re-open, though there is no 
mention of how the government intends to dispose of these 
delinquents. 
 
-- (1) Deposits cannot exceed seven times paid-in capital. 
-- (2) Total loans can be no more than 70 percent of total 
deposits. 
-- (3) As announced in June, all "call deposit" accounts 
(popular "hot money" accounts that offered an annual 4-10 
percent interest rate, compounded daily, with no restrictions 
on withdrawals) must be closed. 
-- (4) All Central Bank of Myanmar credit lines must be 
repaid.  According to one banker, most of the banks, which 
took only minimal credit when the crisis broke, have paid off 
their debt.  However, banks with larger outstanding debt -- 
such as Asia Wealth Bank (the country's largest), which 
borrowed 15 billion kyat (about $15 million) -- are in more 
difficult straits. 
-- (5) All Central Bank loans made against banks' government 
bonds must be repaid. 
-- (6) Only government bonds will be considered as paid-in 
capital.  Currently government bonds pay 8.5 percent for 3 
years or 9 percent for 5 years while inflation is running 
30-40 percent thus far in 2003. 
-- (7) Private banks must bring all their accounts into line 
with pre-existing, but largely ignored, bank management 
requirements.  These include IMF-recommended 5-10 percent 
reserve requirement (depending on the type of deposit), 20 
percent liquidity requirement, and 10 percent capital 
adequacy ratio. 
 
¶4. (C) At this time, banking sector pundits are predicting 
that among the largest (by deposits) pre-crash banks, KBZ 
Bank (run by a close associate of Vice Senior General Maung 
Aye), Myanmar Mayflower Bank (capitalized largely by ethnic 
Wa businessmen), and Myanmar Overseas Bank will clear the 
hurdle -- or be allowed over the hurdle for political 
reasons.  Asia Wealth Bank and Yoma Bank, by far the two 
largest banks, and the two banks accused of the worst banking 
practices, are not expected to make the cut and will 
supposedly be reassessed at year's end. 
 
Throw Back the Little Ones 
 
¶5. (C) On a positive note, officials from some of the 
fourteen smaller private banks tell us that most of their 
institutions have already passed the seven tests, and have 
not been stopped from resuming normal operations -- though 
they have not received official clearance to do so.  However, 
this will do little to assist the economy or return money to 
the private banking system.  These banks have very small 
capital bases and loan portfolios, few depositors, few 
branches, and are generally in place to serve niche markets. 
Also, bankers concur with our assumption that most average 
Burmese will eschew the private banks, large and small, for 
years to come regardless of the government's certifications. 
 
Haven't We Learned Anything? 
 
¶6. (C) We had hoped that the government would learn some 
lessons from this eight-month-old crisis and address 
fundamental flaws that helped spark and fuel the debacle. 
The needs were clear: punish rogue bankers, rebuild consumer 
confidence, create an independent Central Bank and task it to 
improve oversight of lending practices, apply and enforce 
reasonable financial standards, and relax some of the 
burdensome regulations -- such as capping deposit and lending 
rates well below inflation -- that encouraged cowboy banking 
in order to turn a profit.  Though some of the GOB's new 
conditions are sound, none of these crucial issues was 
adequately addressed.  The GOB has kept its onerous pre-crash 
policies intact and imposed broad new standards.  Adding a 
low deposit ceiling and lending limitations to interest rate 
caps will make turning a profit nearly impossible.  The 
government has also made no specific commitment to 
independent oversight of lending -- other than threats of 
more frequent visits by military intelligence to suspect 
borrowers. 
 
¶7. (C) Certainly some businesspeople will bring their 
deposits and other business back to private banks when and if 
they emerge "rehabilitated."  However, it is unclear how the 
government expects private banks to win back the majority of 
their suspicious customers and otherwise operate in this new, 
more restrictive environment.  Perhaps it does not.  There 
have long been rumors that the GOB's top leadership disliked 
the private banks because they were "disruptive forces" and 
controlled significant cash reserves.  True or not, in this 
atmosphere we don't see the private banking sector being able 
to return even to its relatively small pre-crash role in the 
Burmese economy. 
Martinez