This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 000202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/31/2003 
TAGS: PREL CA ARF
SUBJECT: CANADA: ARF STATEMENT SHOULD REFLECT CONSENSUS 
 
REF: STATE 13788 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor, Brian Flora. Reason 1.5b. 
 
 
¶1. (C)  Post provided Canada's Department of Foreign Affairs 
and International Trade (DFAIT) Deputy Director for Regional 
Security and Peacekeeping Division, Sarah Smith and Deputy 
Director for Korea, Hartmuth Kroll, talking points and texts 
of the proposed statement by the Chairman of the ASEAN 
Regional Forum (ARF), the Chairman's letter to ARF member 
states, and the proposed U.S. alternative language as 
contained in REFTEL on January 16.  Smith told poloff that 
Canada had already received copies of the ARF Chairman's 
letter and proposed statement and Canada's Ambassador to 
Cambodia would be engaging the ARF chairman concerning the 
Government of Canada's thoughts on the draft statement.  She 
noted that her government was in the process of preparing 
alternative language and though not able to share it with the 
U.S. at that time, would do so as soon as it was fully vetted 
through her government. 
 
¶2.  (C)  On January 17, Smith and Kroll provided poloff the 
following suggested amendments to the ARF Chairman's 
statement: 
 
quote: 
Proposed Amendments by Canada 
para 1. (no change)  The ASEAN Regional Forum, the only 
regional political and security forum in the Asia-Pacific, 
remains deeply concerned over the negative impact on the 
situation on the Korean Peninsula of recent actions by the 
DPRK with respect to its nuclear program which negatively 
affect pace, stability and security in the region and the 
integrity of the international non-proliferation regime. 
Further development of this program could also undermine the 
confidence and security-building measures being undertaken by 
the ARF. 
 
para 2. ARF participating states are seriously concerned by 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's non-compliance 
with international non-proliferation norms, and in particular 
its announcement of its withdrawal from the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty and to terminate its safeguards cooperation with the 
IAEA. 
 
(Our preferred option is to delete para 3. Otherwise , we 
would redraft as follows) 
 
para 3.  The ARF takes note of the 1994 Framework Agreement 
between the DPRK and the USA, which recognizes the obligation 
to observe international non-proliferation commitments. 
 
para 4.  All ARF participating states support a nuclear-free 
Korean peninsula.  Adherence to norms of international 
non-proliferation and the exercise of self-restraint by all 
parties at his juncture are critical to the maintenance of 
peace and security on the Korean peninsula. 
 
para 5.  The ARF believes that there is a basis for a 
diplomatic resolution which could contribute to the reduction 
of tensions on the Korean peninsula and to the settlement of 
the fundamental issues.   We welcome recent proposals which 
have been forthcoming in this regard and encourage the DPRK 
to respond positively. 
 
para 6.  In this light, the ARF call on the DPRK to resume 
its cooperation with the IAEA and to reverse its decision to 
withdraw from the NPT.  At the same time, it urges all 
parties concerned to engage in dialogue and consultation to 
address and settle the concerns of all in order to bring 
about a peaceful, secure and nuclear-free Korean peninsula. 
end quote 
 
¶3. (C)  After presenting Canadian's suggested changes, Kroll 
said his government believes the ARF Chairman would be more 
likely to acccept suggested edits to his original proposed 
statement rather than a complete redraft such as the U.S. 
proposal (reftel).  He stressed, however, that the ARF 
Chairman be made to understand the importance of consistent 
messaging on this sensitive issue and that it is critical 
that ARF members not break ranks or issue inconsistent 
signals that the DPRK could exploit.  He added that Canada is 
not, repeat not, in favor of any language that would frame 
the current developments on the Korean peninsula as a 
bi-lateral problem. Both Kroll and Smith stressed that 
regardless of the eventual language used, the ASEAN member 
states must reach consensus, and if that takes time -- so be 
it. 
KELLY