This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 003528 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, PMAT; OSD FOR ISA AND ISP; JCS 
FOR J5; EUCOM FOR J5, POLAD; CENTCOM FOR J5 AND POLAD; 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR MOPS TU IZ PTER ASEC
SUBJECT: MFA U/S ZIYAL STRESSES IRAQ IN 5/22 MEETING WITH 
EUR DAS PASCOE 
 
REF: ANKARA 2373 
 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador W. Robert Pearson.  Reasons: 
1.5 (B and D). 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
 
¶1. (C) MFA U/S Ziyal told visiting EUR DAS Lynn Pascoe May 22 
his main objective was to get the US-Turkey bilateral 
relationship back on track.  Ziyal said he was looking 
forward to meeting with USG officials in Washington and 
suggested the second week of June.  On Iraq, Ziyal said it 
was important for the US and Turkey to work together to 1) 
make sure there is proper representation of the Turkmen in 
the IIA, 2) correct the perception that the US prefers the 
Kurds over Turkey and 3) make sure the "jockeying" for 
positions of authority by the groups in Iraq leads to a 
representative, cohesive IIA.  Ziyal thanked DAS Pascoe for 
the USG's support for the MFA delegation's recent visit to 
Iraq.  Based on the delegation's recommendations, Ziyal said 
the MFA will be looking to increase humanitarian assistance 
to the north and expand the Habur gate to increase commerce. 
Ziyal reiterated that Turkey's relations with Syria and Iran 
were not inconsistent with USG policy.  DAS Pascoe closed by 
noting that the way to overcome disappointment over Iraq and 
Cyprus was for Turkey to take concrete steps on issues of 
concern to both our countries.  End summary. 
 
 
------------------- 
VISIT TO WASHINGTON 
------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (C) Ziyal opened the meeting by saying he looking forward 
to traveling to Washington soon to engage in "open and frank" 
discussions with USG officials.  He said the second week of 
June "worked best" for him, adding that the initial set of 
dates (May 28-29) under discussion "would not give him time 
to do his homework."  Ziyal said if U/S Grossman were able to 
visit Ankara beforehand, "that would be great." 
 
 
------------------------------- 
MFA DELEGATION TO IRAQ:  THANKS 
------------------------------- 
 
 
¶3. (C) Ziyal said that while the situation in Iraq appeared 
to be improving, there were a number of issues which required 
close watching.  These include: relations among the parties 
on the ground, coordination of humanitarian assistance, the 
increasing confidence of the Kurds, and the PKK/KADEK threat. 
 Ziyal said one of his long-term concerns was the increasing 
possibility of Kurdish-Arab conflicts.  He also stressed it 
was important the Turkmen not be seen as an extension of 
Turkey.  Ziyal said it was important to make sure the 
"jockeying" for positions of authority by the groups in Iraq 
leads to a representative, cohesive IIA in Baghdad. 
 
 
¶4. (C) Ziyal thanked the USG for its support for the MFA 
delegation's recent visit to Iraq.  Ziyal said the team had 
had a number of good and constructive meetings with US 
officials, Kurdish groups (including PUK leader Talabani and 
hopefully KDP chief Barzani 5/23) and Turkmen (note: Ziyal's 
assessment is consistent with the readouts the MFA delegation 
provided the Embassy via telephone from Iraq during its 
visit.  End note.)  Ziyal said the delegation was 
particularly pleased with its meeting with 101st Commander MG 
Petreus in Mosul, a meeting Ziyal he characterized as 
extremely useful. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Ziyal said the delegation's findings during its visit 
to Iraq had led to three main conclusions: 
 
 
--There needs to be a "proper" representation for the Turkmen 
in the IIA.  Ziyal stressed that the representation must be 
"proper" and not "undue," since "undue" representation for 
any group in Iraq would be counterproductive.  Ziyal stressed 
the importance of making sure the Turkmen do not suffer in 
the new Iraq and that the Turkmen not be seen as an extension 
of Turkey. 
 
 
--The Habur border gate needs to be "opened and 
demilitarized" on both sides to allow a greater flow of 
people and commerce into Iraq.  Ziyal added the Turks were 
also looking into the possibility of opening a second gate 
(one near Syria but one that did not open into Syria). 
(Note: MFA DDG for the Middle East Gokturk later told us the 
loosening of restrictions at Habur on the Turkish side likely 
will involve considerable internal debate between Turkish 
civilian/commercial organizations -- who favor the opening of 
the border -- and the Turkish military -- which has 
controlled the border since 1991 and sees the gate's 
"militarization" as essential to preventing the influx of 
PKK/KADEK.  Gokturk speculated that the PKK/KADEK issue would 
have to be addressed to the satisfaction of the Turkish 
military in order to secure the military's cooperation on 
Habur.  End note.) 
 
 
--There is a vital and immediate humanitarian role that 
Turkey can and should play. 
 
 
¶6. (C) Ziyal said the delegation would depart Baghdad May 23 
for Mosul/Dohuk (where it hoped to meet with KDP leader 
Barzani) and return to Turkey March 24.  Ziyal said the MFA 
would provide the Embassy a complete readout of its visit 
upon its return. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
TURKEY'S POLICIES ON SYRIA/IRAN:  CONSISTENT WITH WASHINGTON 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
 
¶7. (C) Ziyal reiterated the arguments that he made to the 
Ambassador May 13 (reftel) -- Turkey's relations with Syria 
and Iran were not inconsistent with USG policy. Ziyal said 
Turkey shared the same values and goals in the Middle East as 
the USG: stability, democracy and prosperity throughout the 
region.  Ziyal said the Middle East Peace Process was an 
important part of Turkey's overall Middle East policy, and 
Turkey strongly supported current US efforts to bring about 
peace between Israel and Palestine.  Ziyal noted that the 
Israeli president had accepted President Sezer's invitation 
to visit Turkey and would be doing so July 8-9, and that the 
Israeli MOD would be visiting Ankara the week of May 26.  Abu 
Mazen would be visiting Turkey in the near future and FM Gul 
planned to travel to Israel and Palestine "soon." 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
THE VIEW FROM WASHINGTON -- NEED FOR CONCRETE ACTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
¶8. (C) DAS Pascoe closed the meeting by reminding U/S Ziyal 
that Washington hoped to see concrete actions by Turkey to 
deal with the disappointment in the US over Iraq and Cyprus. 
We had worked very hard to address Turkish concerns on Iraq 
and on the Annan plan for Cyprus and had expected both to be 
successful.  He noted he had been discussing at length the 
areas for possible steps with others in the Foreign Ministry. 
 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U) DAS Pascoe has cleared this message. 
PEARSON