This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161742Z Oct 03C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006622 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/16/2013 
TAGS: PREL ECON IZ JO
SUBJECT: KING, GOVERNMENT PUBLICLY SUPPORT IRAQ 
RECONSTRUCTION AND TRAINING FOR IRAQI POLICE; ISLAMISTS 
STRONGLY OPPOSE 
 
 
Classified By: Amb. Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (b)(d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Both Prime Minister Abul Ragheb and King Abdullah 
continue to publicly express their support for direct 
Jordanian involvement in reconstruction efforts in Iraq, 
including security-related training.  The Jordanian Cabinet 
formally endorsed October 14 a contract for the training in 
Jordan of up to 32,000 members of the Iraqi police.  The 
Islamic Action Front (IAF), on the other hand, continues to 
call on the GOJ to refrain from actions, including training 
and the dispatch of troops, that would "legitimize" or 
facilitate the American occupation of Iraq.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS "YES" TO IRAQ RECONSTRUCTION . . . 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Jordanian Prime Minister Abul Ragheb recently held a 
series of publicized meetings with visiting Iraq officials in 
which he stressed Jordan's commitment to assist in the 
reconstruction of Iraq.  On October 9, Abul Ragheb met with 
Iraqi Minister of Transportation Bahnam Bolis to discuss 
transport and economic cooperation between Jordan and Iraq. 
Similarly, during the recent Jordan Economic Forum, Abul 
Ragheb met with Iraqi Housing and Reconstruction Minister 
Bayan Zubeidi to promote cooperation between the private 
sectors of the two countries and joint Jordanian-Iraqi 
projects in the rebuilding of Iraq. 
 
¶3.  (C) Abul Ragheb was careful to emphasize to the press 
that Jordan wants to see a complete return of sovereignty to 
the Iraqi people and the (eventual) withdrawal of all foreign 
forces.  But these recent meetings, like Abul 
Ragheb's prior talks with members of the Iraqi Governing 
Council (IGC), clearly demonstrate the GOJ's continued strong 
backing of CPA reconstruction efforts. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
. . . AND "YES" TO POLICE TRAINING . . . 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Attending the World Economic Forum's East Asia Summit 
in Singapore October 13, King Abdullah publicly voiced his 
support for the training of Iraqi police in Jordan.  The King 
characterized the police training as a positive step in the 
restoration of normal life for Iraqis, and he stressed 
Jordan's commitment to help the Iraqi people by 
"rehabilitating" its professionals from various fields.  The 
King drew the line, however, on sending troops into Iraq, 
saying that "I don't think that any country that borders Iraq 
should play an active role inside of Iraq." 
 
¶5.  (C) On October 14, the Jordanian Cabinet formally 
endorsed a contractual agreement signed October 11 between 
the CPA and the Jordanian Public Security Department (PSD) to 
provide training in Jordan for up to 32,000 members of the 
Iraqi police (N.B: two side letters, necessary to make the 
contract operational, have yet to be signed pending a further 
round of negotiations to begin October 16).  Minister of 
Information Nabil Sharif told the press that the PSD would 
carry out the training "in association with the concerned 
bodies in Iraq," and further stated that the training would 
"help our Iraqi brothers reinstate order and security to 
their country." 
 
-------------------------------- 
. . . BUT THE ISLAMISTS SAY "NO" 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Reflecting its deep opposition to the U.S. presence 
in Iraq, the IAF has denounced plans to train Iraqi police in 
Jordan.  In a memo sent by the IAF to the Prime Minister 
around October 6, the IAF called on the GOJ to retract its 
decision to provide police training.  The IAF argued that the 
offer of training had been coerced by occupation forces as 
"part of the American-British project to wipe out national 
resistance."  The memo also stated that Iraqi "resistance 
fighters" had admonished neighboring countries not to assist 
the occupation of Iraq and, consequently, the IAF warned that 
if the GOJ moved forward with its plans, "the battleground 
might move to Jordan or reach our sons and interests in 
Iraq." 
 
¶7.  (U) In a similar move, the IAF recently sent another 
letter to the Prime Minister warning against sending 
Jordanian forces into Iraq.  In the letter, the IAF asserted 
that it had received information about "secret plans" to 
dispatch 3,000 Jordanian troops to Baghdad.  The IAF 
leadership branded such a move as "dangerous" and asked the 
Prime Minister to put out an official statement denying these 
rumors. 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C) The divide between the stance of the King and the 
government, on one hand, and the IAF, on the other, with 
respect to security assistance for Iraq shows no signs of 
narrowing.  Although the IAF cannot legitimately claim to 
speak for a majority of Jordanians, it is trying to tap into 
a strong public sense of unease about the U.S. presence in 
Iraq and GOJ moves perceived as assisting that presence.  The 
IAF has not ruled out all cooperation with 
Iraqis, as evidenced by its non-objection to increased trade 
between Jordan and Iraq, but only condones "cooperation with 
legitimate governments that represent the interests of their 
people and nation, not an occupation that oppresses them, 
plunders their resources, and confiscates their will." 
Against this backdrop, the King and his government will have 
to tread softly in public as they back U.S. efforts to 
restore security in Iraq. 
 
¶9.  (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/amman/ 
 
or access the site through the State Department's SIPRNET 
home page. 
GNEHM