This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 COLOMBO 000473 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (FOR JWALLER); SA/PD LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, WREINCKENS; 
SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  IRAQ 
 
 
¶1. Independent English daily wonders whether "war on Iraq 
[will] free US from terrorists threat." 
 
Under the headline "Will war on Iraq free US from 
terrorists threat?, the ISLAND (opposition English daily, 
islandwide circulation) wrote on 3/21: 
 
The question arises whether elimination of the Saddam 
Hussein regime will rid America and European nations from 
the threat of terrorism.  The war in Afghanistan and 
driving out the Taleban regime, have not eliminated the Al 
Queda and its leader bin Laden. Even US intelligence 
agencies such as the CIA and FBI have said openly that 
America will not be free of terrorist attacks. Much 
progress has been made in the Global War on Terrorism and 
President Bush has been receiving a good response to his 
appeal from most countries, including many Islamic states. 
But it is evident that that he is jeopardising his global 
effort on terrorism with this war which has proven to be 
much unpopular. 
 
¶2. Government-owned English daily ponders local fallout, 
praises government's preparations. 
 
Under the headline "Tiding over emergencies," the DAILY 
NEWS (government-owned English daily, islandwide 
circulation) wrote on 3/21: 
 
With tensions further intensifying in the Gulf, many a 
Lankan heart is going out to the numerous local migrant 
workers in the Middle East who would now have to grapple 
with a whole host of imponderables.  Apparently, not many 
Lankans are employed in Iraq itself but a considerable 
number of them are employed in Saudi Arabia and other 
neighbouring countries which could be expected to be 
affected by a war in the Gulf.  Their safety should be a 
prime concern for the State and for the people of this 
country. 
 
Fortunately, the Government has taken cognizance of this 
requirement.  ... every possible step has been taken to 
evacuate some 500,000 Lankan expatriate workers in the 
Middle East, to "safe areas" with the help of Lankan 
missions in the region.... 
 
Besides the provision of these facilities and security 
measures, evacuation plans should also be envisaged for 
these workers in the event of the war having grave 
spillover effects.  It would be best for the State to be 
prepared for serious humanitarian crises although we hope 
fervently that there would be no prolonged suffering for 
anyone. 
 
Food shortages need to be anticipated and the necessary 
measures taken to ensure that essential commodities are 
stocked and rationed, if necessary.  We hope the new 
regulations would ensure the fulfilment of these conditions 
and provide for the efficient running of local food supply 
systems. 
 
There is every possibility of unscrupulous traders cashing- 
in on situations of this kind to ensure self-enrichment. 
Times of hardship invariably turn out to be opportunities 
for hoarding and for earning a fast buck by the more 
parasitic of businessmen.  It is up to the authorities to 
guard against such dangers. 
 
¶3. Independent Sinhala daily says that Saddam's imprudence 
in 1990 is being matched by American imprudence today. 
 
Under the headline "Now showing!" DIVAINA (opposition 
Sinhala daily) wrote on 3/21: 
 
The hi tech war movie on worldwide TV channels.  This is 
about a war initiated by a undisciplined and stubborn war- 
loving man to manipulate another of the same ilk. 
 
George W. has planned this war for a long time and Saddam 
looks happy to receive it. 
 
Using the same bull-in-a-China-shop approached that it 
followed in Vietnam decades ago, and in Afghanistan a year 
ago, the US is putting the whole world in grave danger.... 
And Saddam is ready....  For each missile that Bush sends, 
Saddam will reply with a missile of smallpox, yellow fever, 
etc.  We have constantly been aware of this and have often 
expressed our views.... 
 
We have absolutely no regard for Saddam, who is a bloody 
dictator who controls millions of people in Iraq.  But if 
Bush is using this situation to take control of Iraq's oil 
reserves, or to realize some other hidden objective, we 
condemn that, too 
 
One must be wise enough to understand the limits of one's 
freedom.  Saddam didn't show prudence in 1990 when Iraq 
invaded Kuwait.  George B. isn't showing it today. 
 
¶4. Independent Sinhala daily suggests "Let's be prepare for 
the impact of the war." 
 
Under the headline "Let's be prepared for the impact of 
war" LANKADEEPA (independent Sinhala daily) wrote on 3/21: 
No one can say how and when the war will be over, but one 
thing is clear:  billions of people -- in Iraq and other 
developing countries -- will face numerous difficulties. 
To this the Sri Lankan government should give priority.  It 
is urgent and vital. 
 
Ministers of Labor and of Consumer affairs have spoken of 
migrant workers and consumer items and food and petroleum. 
But consistent attention is vital, as almost everything in 
our country loses its fizz after some time. 
 
Hundreds of thousands of Sri Lankans work in the Middle 
East.  They earn vital foreign exchange for us.  If that is 
hampered, we will lose the forex and, also, unemployment in 
the country will increase significantly.... 
 
Who can assure harmony in foreign employment, forex, fuel 
prices, food supply?  ... a short-term program is urgently 
needed; the government should start something ASAP! 
 
Wills