This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000439 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/04/2012 
TAGS: PREL PHUM BM ASSK NLD
SUBJECT: REGIME EASES UP ON ASSK HARASSMENT 
 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN M. MARTINEZ FOR REASON 1.5(D). 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary: NLD spokesman U Lwin told Poloff on April 
7 that ASSK and party were harassed by SPDC and local 
authorities representatives for the first few days of their 
visit to Chin State.  However, Military Intelligence (MI) 
officials, who provided earlier assurances that there would 
be no such harassment, have apparently stepped in to prevent 
further incidents.  The sequence of events indicates that the 
SPDC is still working out how best to manage relations with 
the NLD within Senior General Than Shwe's overarching 
hard-line policy.  End Summary. 
¶2. (SBU)  In spite of the authorities, efforts to prevent 
people from turning out for ASSK as she traveled through 
Magwe Division to Chin State, NLD spokesman U Lwin told 
Poloff that large crowds chose to risk official threats of 
"serious consequences" to greet her.  He cited as an example, 
a town in Chin State in which the community turned out in a 
silent candle vigil along the roadside to welcome ASSK and 
her party as they arrived late at night.  According to U 
Lwin, harassment during the first four days of the visit 
included the following: 
 
-- local authorities played loud recordings of Buddhist 
prayers and sermons denouncing ASSK as an enemy and stating 
that she was unwelcome; 
 
-- the Minister of Information and Deputy Ministers of Home 
Affairs, Religious Affairs, and Mines visited the area just 
ahead of ASSK telling their local employees and other 
residents along her route to stay home during her visit. 
They threatened serious actions against any employees and 
their families who showed support for the NLD, noting that 
videotapes would be taken to identify those who turned out to 
see ASSK; 
 
-- the Deputy Minister for Mines told his Ministry's 
employees that there would be no dialogue with the NLD or 
transfer of power (Note: This echoes similar remarks 
attributed to Secretary Two Lt. General Soe Win at a USDA 
gathering in Pyay about two months ago.  End Note); 
 
--  local authorities believed to be USDA members used 
abusive language to disburse crowds gathering to meet ASSK 
and threatened actions against locals painting signs wishing 
ASSK good health. 
 
¶3. (SBU)    U Lwin said he reported these abuses as he 
learned of them to the NLD's MI liaison, Brigadier General 
Than Tun, who had earlier provided assurances to U Lwin and 
ASSK personally that there would be no such harassment on 
this trip.  U Lwin told Poloff that Than Tun appeared 
genuinely surprised that the harassment was occurring, and 
that it was being directed by SPDC Ministers and Deputy 
Ministers.  A turning point apparently came on April 6, 
according to U Lwin, when election committee authorities 
(under the Ministry of Home Affairs) in Haka, the capitol of 
Chin State, refused to allow ASSK to open the NLD office 
there.  Prior to the trip, MI had agreed to allow ASSK to 
open six NLD offices during her trip, including the office in 
Haka.  U Lwin said he reported the incident to MI at noon and 
within 15 minutes, the NLD party in Haka called to tell him 
they had received word that they could open the office. 
Since that time, U Lwin told Poloff, the harassment of ASSK 
and her party appears to have ended, and she opened another 
township office early on April 7 without incident. 
 
¶4. (C)  Comment: Although ASSK will be traveling for 
approximately five more days and more harassment could occur, 
U Lwin appeared hopeful that MI has now stepped in to ensure 
the rest of the trip goes smoothly.  The SPDC's handling of 
the trip highlights continuing internal differences on how 
best to handle relations with the NLD.  The dispatching of 
the Minister of Information and several Deputy Ministers to 
the area to whip up public sentiment against ASSK and 
threaten those interested in turning out to see her is 
consistent with the hard-line that Senior General Than Shwe 
appears to have laid down on no dialogue or power sharing 
with ASSK.  These actions indicate little interest in 
pursuing the non-confrontational relations between the SPDC 
and NLD that Special Envoy Razali has tried to nurture since 
late 2000.  However, MI appears to be pursuing a less harsh 
approach, perhaps hoping to avoid negative international 
press such as that received after the harassment of ASSK on 
her Rakhine trip late last year.  While MI must conform to 
the Senior General's overall hard-line stance, its efforts to 
coordinate ASSK's travel, even if only to avoid bad press, 
provide her the opportunity to continue to rebuild the party 
structure and patiently but consistently push for democratic 
reform. End Comment. 
Martinez