This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 14 HANOI 000527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/RSP, AND 
EAP/BCLTV 
 
STATE PASS TO USAID 
 
USDOL FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KCRM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB VM TIP LABOR
SUBJECT: VIETNAM - ANNUAL ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
REPORT, 2003 
 
REF: A) STATE 22225 
 
     B) 2002 HANOI 03000 
     C) 2002 HANOI 01790 
     D) 2002 HANOI 01061 
 
¶1.  (U) As instructed ref A, post provides input for the 
2003 Anti-trafficking in Persons report.  The point of 
contact in Vietnam is Tim Swanson, tel. 84-4-772-1500 and 
fax 84-4-772-2614.  Post estimates that collecting 
information for and drafting the report required 48 hours, 
including 8 hours by an FSN.  Post would appreciate having 
the opportunity to comment on the placement and the report 
language for Vietnam based on the following information. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Below are answers to the questions posed in 
paragraphs 16, 17, 18, and 19 of ref A. 
 
Begin response to questions. 
 
¶16.  Overview: 
 
¶A.  Vietnam is both a country of origin and transit for 
trafficked persons.  In addition, women and children are 
also trafficked within Vietnam, usually from rural to urban 
areas.  Poor women and teenage girls, especially those from 
rural areas, are most at risk for being trafficked.  Men 
from similar situations are more likely to seek low paid, 
unskilled, manual labor either in Vietnam's cities or 
abroad. 
 
Vietnam has neither comprehensive nor reliable statistics on 
the numbers of persons trafficked from and through Vietnam. 
However, local and foreign experts agree the numbers are 
proportionally lower than those of most other countries in 
the region. 
 
Available statistics are primarily based on cases brought to 
court through 2001.  Because this data only counts cases 
that are discovered and prosecuted, they underestimate the 
true extent of trafficking in persons in Vietnam.  Only 
partial statistics are available for 2002, although the 
officials of the Supreme People's Procuracy have stated that 
"hundreds" of traffickers are prosecuted annually.  An 
article published in 2002 in newspapers of the Border Guards 
Command and the Ministry of Public Security (MPS) reported 
256 trafficking cases with 438 defendants in 2001 and 213 
cases with 351 defendants in 2000.  Between the beginning of 
2001 and early 2003, MPS recorded 270 court cases involving 
trafficking to China with 428 defendants, of whom 200 were 
men.  During the same time period, MPS noted 1080 victims of 
trafficking to China, including 1058 women and girls as well 
as 22 boys.  One MPS estimate is that the actual volume of 
trafficking is six to ten times higher, but Post is unaware 
of the basis for this guess.  On average in the 1990's, 
Vietnamese courts heard 300-400 cases per year, involving 
500-700 trafficking victims.  According to a 2001 Vietnamese 
press report, between 1996 and 2000, police "cracked down on 
61 women trafficking rings involving 598 individuals."  The 
statistics available do not include information on 
conviction rates for trafficking and related charges, but 
the overall conviction rate in Vietnamese courts is about 
95%.  Therefore, post believes that nearly as many 
traffickers were convicted as prosecuted. 
 
Data available from border guards concerning women and 
children being trafficked abroad are spotty.  According to 
one report, between 1990-2000, approximately 20,000 young 
women and girls went to China to become brides, domestic 
workers, or sex workers; however, it is not clear how many 
were victims of trafficking.  (Note: Observers believe many, 
if not most, of these young women were voluntary migrants 
and, at least initially, not victims of trafficking.)  Also 
according to border statistics, from 1995-2000, 5000 women 
and children were trafficked to, and subsequently escaped 
from, Cambodia.  As with other statistics available on 
trafficking, these data likely underestimate the magnitude 
of the problem.  According to a Vietnamese press report 
dated 11/28/01, "Seventy percent, or 31,500, of a total of 
45,000 prostitutes working in Cambodia is Vietnamese, of 
whom 30% are under 17."  Although some of these sex workers 
were from Cambodia's ethnic Vietnamese minority, some were 
trafficked from Vietnam.  (Note:  Post was not able to 
obtain updated statistics on cross border movements.  End 
note.)  According to International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) sources, "several dozen" Vietnamese 
trafficking victims, many of them teenagers, were 
repatriated from Cambodia in 2001 and 2002. 
 
¶B.   Vietnamese trafficking victims originate primarily from 
poor rural provinces bordering Cambodia and China.  Some 
also come from other nearby highland provinces.  There is 
also evidence that a smaller number of victims are from 
poor, urban areas. 
 
Women and girls trafficked abroad go primarily to Cambodia 
and China.  Some women from Ho Chi Minh City and the Mekong 
Delta who married men from Taiwan were forced into 
prostitution or domestic servitude after their arrival in 
Taiwan.  Since 1995, about 60,000 Vietnamese women have gone 
to Taiwan as brides.  Vietnamese and Taiwan estimates of the 
number who have encountered difficulties, including but not 
limited to trafficking, vary from less than one percent up 
to 14 or 15 percent, but most fall around five percent. 
There have also been reports that Vietnamese women have been 
trafficked to Singapore, Macao, Hong Kong, Malaysia, and 
Thailand.  During 2002, there were at least two local press 
reports about Vietnamese women trafficked for prostitution 
from Ho Chi Minh City to Malaysia via Bangkok.  MPS 
confirmed that trafficking of women to Malaysia is a growing 
problem, with criminal organizations taking advantage of 
labor export programs.  Some of this trafficking occurs 
directly from Vietnam.  There are also reports that 
Vietnamese residing elsewhere in the region have been 
trafficked to third countries.  For example, the Vietnamese 
press reported arrests of traffickers accused of moving 
Vietnamese (and others) from Cambodia to Thailand and 
Malaysia.  MPS noted that is has "good information" that 
some Vietnamese women trafficked to China are subsequently 
trafficked to third countries, especially Japan and the 
United States. 
 
Vietnamese authorities, in cooperation with the INS and 
other third country law enforcement officials, have 
documented cases of trafficking in Vietnamese babies for 
international adoption, especially in the area of directed 
adoption, involving payments to parents in exchange for 
releasing their babies for adoption. 
 
Trafficking also occurs within Vietnam, primarily from poor 
rural areas to the relatively wealthier urban areas of Ho 
Chi Minh City, Hanoi, Haiphong, and Danang.  In the past, 
Vietnamese officials have been relatively reluctant to 
acknowledge internal trafficking.  More recently, officials 
have discussed internal trafficking alongside international 
trafficking and have noted that the definition of 
trafficking in Vietnamese law does not require crossing a 
border.   There are no official data on the extent of 
internal trafficking.  According to one MPS estimate, 
domestic trafficking accounted for approximately 44.5% of 
all Vietnamese women trafficked, although experts in 
trafficking issues question the origin and reliability of 
this statistic, suspecting it may be too high.  Experts 
agreed the GVN has begun to give greater attention to the 
issue of internal trafficking. 
 
Vietnam is also a known transit point for trafficking. 
While Vietnamese authorities focus on protecting and 
providing services to Vietnamese citizens, U.S. and third 
country law enforcement officials note that third country 
organized criminal gangs use Vietnam as a transit point from 
China and a number of Middle Eastern countries to Australia, 
Europe, and Canada.  Vietnamese police cooperate with third 
country law enforcement personnel on such cases.  According 
to an INS official in Vietnam this cooperation has 
progressed to the point that not only are Vietnamese 
officials reacting to tips and queries but are also asking 
INS and the Australian Federal Police for advice and 
collaboration on suspected cases.  Such cases prompted 
Australia and Vietnam to sign an agreement stating their 
mutual commitment to combating trafficking in women and 
children.  Vietnam has clearly and repeatedly indicated its 
willingness to conclude other such agreements, including 
with the United States. 
 
¶C.  Reliable statistical information on trafficking in 
persons remains scarce and incomplete.  UNICEF and MPS 
reported that 2002 survey of ten northern provinces showed 
that a growing proportion of victims were coming from 
provinces far from the China border.  UNICEF also noted that 
some recently repatriated victims from China were actually 
from southern Vietnam and had been trafficked to China 
through Cambodia.  Preliminary findings of a 
UNDP/International Labor Organization (ILO) study conducted 
in conjunction with a project to combat trafficking in the 
Mekong sub-region discovered that many women originally 
reportedly trafficked to China from one province in the 
1990's had not actually been trafficked.  GVN officials have 
been quoted in the press as admitting that trafficking was a 
growing problem.  All sources Post interviewed for this 
report claimed, however, that it was impossible to tell 
whether the problem was growing; while there is some feeling 
that it may be leveling off, no officials claimed that it 
was declining.  It is not clear if the overall problem is 
indeed growing, or if it is merely the officials' awareness 
of trafficking (and its patterns and causes) that is 
growing. 
 
¶D.  UNODCP plans to undertake a thorough survey of 
trafficking in Vietnam in cooperation with the MPS, the 
Supreme People's Procuracy, and the Women's Union.  The 
project would also set up a sustainable data collection 
system to be housed within a new office of crime statistics 
within the Procuracy.  Post has submitted a funding request 
to INL to carry out this project (Ref B).  The Vietnam 
portion of a UNDP/ILO regional project combating trafficking 
in women and children in the Mekong sub-region is updating 
and reviewing existing studies to gain a more comprehensive 
understanding of trafficking.  This project is also 
developing a case management database that may be used in 
the future to add to what we know about trafficking in 
persons in Vietnam.  Preliminary findings (see 16. C.) 
indicate that many earlier reported cases do not meet the 
definition of trafficking.  The supposed victims reported 
that they had been free to return at any time.  Many 
Vietnamese and international trafficking experts have 
expressed concern about the lack of data, which makes design 
of appropriate prevention and protection measures difficult, 
and are seeking funding from the U.S. and other donors to 
carry out this much needed survey work.   The Asia 
Foundation has received funding from G/TIP for an anti- 
trafficking project, one component of which is research into 
the root causes of trafficking and gaps in available 
coverage.  The project is just getting underway.  UNICEF and 
MPS plan to replicate in ten southern provinces a survey 
they conducted in ten northern provinces in 2002 (see 16. 
C.). 
 
¶E.  Post has no information that Vietnam is a destination 
point for trafficking victims. 
 
¶F.  Poor women and teenage girls, especially those from 
rural areas, are most at risk for being trafficked.  UNICEF 
research showed that victims tend to be from moderately poor 
rural areas and have from six to nine years of education. 
Few come from the most remote and poorest areas, although 
recently there appears to be demand in China for Vietnamese 
ethnic minorities because they are "more docile" than the 
ethnic majority Kinh.  Some are sold or indentured by their 
families as domestic workers or sex workers.  Some want to 
be brides of foreign husbands.  Tales of lucrative 
employment lures others.  They then find themselves forced 
into brothels, abusive marriages, or involuntary servitude, 
especially as domestics.  IOM reports that young girls and 
women who are trafficked often are tricked by enticing 
offers brokered by acquaintances.  In addition, the family 
members of teenage girls in poor rural areas often turn a 
blind eye to the details of perceived lucrative offers for 
their daughters' employment abroad.  Poor families in the 
Mekong Delta region sometimes take a payment of several 
hundred dollars - a large sum for many families (per capita 
income is $400 countrywide and in rural areas is 
considerably lower) - in exchange for allowing their 
daughters to go to Cambodia for an "employment offer."  IOM 
reports that, while there was no indication that the number 
of such victims changed substantially in 2001-2002, the age 
of some girls trafficked to Cambodia has fallen to 13-15, 
something not seen before.  UNICEF also reported that, for 
the first time, in 2002 some girls trafficked to China were 
also as young as 13-15. 
 
Post believes that the Vietnamese traffickers have been 
primarily individual opportunists or small groups.  MPS has 
become concerned with what it describes as progressively 
more sophisticated criminal groups that are using legal 
fronts such as labor export companies and tourism agencies 
to conduct trafficking in persons.  While these groups 
appear to be entirely Vietnamese, some include Vietnamese 
residing abroad.  Anecdotal evidence from organizations such 
as IOM, ILO, and MPS, as well as foreign consular 
authorities in Vietnam, suggest that informal networks 
operate, with "brokers" introducing women and girls to those 
who offer employment abroad, often disguising the real 
nature of the (sex) work.  Frequently, these "brokers" are 
family members or from the same community as the victim.  At 
times, they, too, have been victims of trafficking and 
return to "recruit" others.  Some experts have expressed 
concern that traffickers are becoming more organized and 
developing direct affiliations to others involved in 
smuggling of goods, and perhaps, drug trafficking.  Ministry 
of Justice (MOJ) officials contacted for this report 
indicated that there did not seem to be any significant 
overlap between drug traffickers and human traffickers.  MPS 
has described loosely linked cells, each specializing in 
particular tasks such as recruiting or cross-border 
smuggling, which form chains to carry out human trafficking. 
Reliable observers have noted that individual members of 
Taiwanese organized crime groups are among those bringing 
Vietnamese women to Taiwan through marriage.  However, other 
than use of Vietnam as a transit point for trafficked 
persons, there is little other hard evidence of involvement 
by international organized crime at present. 
 
MPS is paying increasing attention to the involvement of GVN 
officials in trafficking in persons.  Such involvement 
appears primarily to be through providing false documents as 
well as authentic, but fraudulently obtained, passports. 
Greater MPS scrutiny parallels a longer-standing effort to 
crack down on mid- and low-level officials providing false 
documents in support of fraudulent international adoptions. 
 
¶G.  There is a commitment at the highest levels of the GVN 
to combating trafficking in persons.  In 1997, the Prime 
Minister issued a decree instructing GVN ministries to 
combat trafficking in women and children and assigning 
responsibilities in this effort.  Since that time, official 
GVN entities have made a good faith effort to address 
trafficking.  As an initial step, the GVN amended the 
existing criminal code to increase the penalties for 
trafficking in women and children, which is specifically 
prohibited by law.  The GVN developed and has begun 
implementing a five-year Plan of Action Against Prostitution 
2001-2005, which addresses combating trafficking in women 
and children both abroad and internally.  The Ministry of 
Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA) continues to 
work on a dedicated action plan against trafficking in women 
and children.  Conceptually, this would task an 
interministerial working group led by a Deputy Prime 
Minister with coordinating anti-trafficking activities. 
Numerous anti-trafficking initiatives have been and are 
being conducted by a variety of government agencies and 
Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV)-affiliated mass 
organizations.  The GVN has devoted scarce domestic 
resources -- financial, human, and physical -- and drawn on 
international assistance to conduct trafficking initiatives. 
The MOJ, in cooperation with UNICEF, organized a national 
workshop in 2002 to begin efforts to revise laws and 
implement the necessary systemic changes for Vietnam to 
ratify and implement the Optional Protocol Against the Worst 
Forms of Trafficking in Women and Children of the Covenant 
Against Transnational Organized Crime.  In 2002, various GVN 
entities agreed to participate in anti-trafficking projects 
undertaken by the UNODCP, UNICEF, IOM, and the Asia 
Foundation.  In 2002, the GVN actively participated in 
implementing two anti-trafficking projects conducted by the 
UNDP and the ILO as part of their larger Mekong regional 
anti-trafficking programs. 
 
¶H.  The GVN officially condemns trafficking in persons and 
there is no evidence that any GVN agencies have engaged in 
or tolerated trafficking.  However, experts in this field 
report that individual GVN officials, most frequently border 
guards and other low- to mid-level functionaries, have taken 
bribes in return for facilitating trafficking.  Corruption 
by GVN officials is recognized as a serious problem at all 
levels in Vietnam.  According to GVN sources, the GVN has 
prosecuted and convicted a number of officials involved in 
baby selling and other forms of trafficking, but they were 
unable to provide specifics.  Official media reports have 
also mentioned several prosecutions against local officials 
involved in illegal adoption schemes.  In the case of the 
sale of children for fraudulent international adoptions, 
Post has hard evidence of the involvement of some mid-level 
GVN ministry and provincial officials.  MOJ officials noted 
at least four trafficking cases prosecuted against local GVN 
officials in 2002. 
 
State-owned labor supply companies reportedly supplied 
workers to a Korean-owned garment manufacturer, Daewoosa, in 
American Samoa.  These workers were subjected to debt 
bondage, mistreatment, threats, and abuse.  The Korean owner 
has been convicted of involuntary servitude, money 
laundering, conspiracy, and extortion in this case, but was 
not tried on trafficking charges.  There has not been a 
legal determination that these workers were trafficked or 
that the Vietnamese manpower supply companies were involved 
in trafficking.  Partly as a result of this case, the GVN 
initiated a widely publicized review of the operations and 
finances of licensed labor supply companies, which resulted 
in the temporary or permanent suspension of the operating 
licenses of several companies, including one that supplied 
workers to Daewoosa.  In addition, the director of the 
second labor supply company involved with Daewoosa was 
convicted on corruption charges.  While Post is not aware of 
a direct connection between the director's conviction and 
the Daewoosa case, some of our contacts have speculated that 
the investigation that led to his conviction resulted in 
part from the scrutiny brought to bear on the company by the 
American Samoa case. 
 
¶I.  The GVN faces very real financial and manpower 
constraints that limit its anti-trafficking efforts. 
Resource constraints are a major obstacle to progress in the 
fight against trafficking in persons, including prevention, 
investigation and prosecution, and assistance to victims. 
Vietnam is one of the world's poorest countries, with an 
annual per capita income of approximately $400.  Anti- 
trafficking programs compete with other important but under- 
funded public programs including health, poverty 
alleviation, basic sanitation, education, and other public 
services.  Social programs are not the only ones that go 
begging in the budget process.  Infrastructure development, 
law enforcement, and even national defense struggle with 
severe financial constraints.  The country's poverty is the 
major "push" for the poor who are at greatest risk of 
falling victim to trafficking schemes.  The shortage of 
financial resources also keeps GVN salaries very low, widely 
perceived as a major factor contributing to corruption, 
which in turn can facilitate trafficking. 
 
¶17.  Prevention: 
 
¶A.  The GVN has officially acknowledged that trafficking in 
persons is a problem.  NGOs generally give the GVN high 
marks for its forthright efforts to try to prevent 
trafficking; GVN agencies are actively searching for 
additional foreign assistance to address the problem.  GVN 
officials working in the area recognize that trafficking 
could further expand if serious efforts are not made to 
combat it.  National Assembly members have described 
trafficking as a "burning issue." 
 
¶B.  Several GVN agencies and organizations are engaged in 
anti-trafficking work.  MOLISA is responsible for prevention 
and rehabilitation.  Other concerned ministries include the 
MPS, the MOJ, and the Border Guards Command of the Ministry 
of Defense.  Also involved are the GVN Committee for 
Population, Family, and Children (CPFC) (note:  A 2002 
government reorganization merged the Committee for 
Protection and Care of Children (CPCC) with the Committee 
for Population and Family Planning. end note), the Supreme 
People's Procuracy, and several CPV-affiliated mass 
organizations, including the Women's Union, the Youth Union, 
and, to a lesser extent, the Vietnamese Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry and the Vietnamese General Confederation of 
Labor. 
 
¶C.  Yes.  MOLISA, the Women's Union, and the CPFC all have 
active information campaigns using a variety of formats, 
including distribution of leaflets and training of community 
trainers aimed at populations deemed to be at risk, as well 
as general information campaigns via the state-owned media. 
These campaigns have been useful, but experts have stated 
that both the messages and the methods are staid and could 
be improved to increase campaigns' effectiveness, especially 
in the south.  The Asia Foundation is beginning a USG-funded 
project in cooperation with the Women's Union that will test 
and evaluate the suitability of several international best 
practices in information campaigns. 
 
¶D.  GVN and CPV-affiliated organizations also conduct 
programs to prevent trafficking, such as vocational 
training, enterprise development, and micro-credit.  There 
is general agreement that one of the major underlying 
factors leading to trafficking in Vietnam is poverty and 
uneven distribution of the benefits of the economic reforms 
and integration underway since the late 1980's.  Therefore, 
these organizations support programs designed to create jobs 
and alleviate poverty.  Such projects have long been 
conducted under large poverty alleviation programs.  More 
recently, the GVN and international donors have begun 
incorporating them as specific strategies in anti- 
trafficking programs.  The GVN raised the level of universal 
education from six years to nine years in 2001. 
 
¶E.  The GVN supports prevention programs. Prevention efforts 
are focused on education of at-risk populations, vocational 
training, micro-credit programs, and other poverty 
alleviation programs.  More resources would be readily 
welcomed by those agencies involved in prevention.  GVN 
agencies have actively sought assistance from the USG and 
other governments to confront the problem. 
 
¶F.  The UN agencies in Hanoi, led by UNICEF, UNDP, and 
UNODCP, have undertaken efforts to establish a strategic 
working group to pull together GVN, NGO, IO, and individual 
donor governments to coordinate efforts on trafficking in 
persons in Vietnam.  UNICEF has also worked to facilitate 
cooperation between Vietnamese and Chinese authorities to 
combat trafficking.  UNICEF has also worked extensively with 
MOLISA, MPS, the Border Guards Command, and the MOJ on 
various anti-trafficking projects.  Individual NGOs and 
international organizations cooperate on specific projects 
around the country.  For example, IOM conducted a nation- 
wide education campaign in concert with GVN agencies and 
international actors such as UNICEF.  IOM is currently 
partnered with the Women's Union and the CPFC in a number of 
provinces to provide rehabilitation assistance for 
returnees.  MOLISA has partnered with UNDP and ILO on two 
large regional anti-trafficking projects.  Small, domestic 
NGO-like organizations exist, and a few have anti- 
trafficking activities.  However, no legal framework exists 
yet permitting the formal establishment of domestic NGO's. 
Therefore, these groups work primarily with international 
entities and are not able to cooperate or interact 
effectively with official GVN agencies. 
 
¶G.  It is difficult for the GVN adequately to monitor its 
borders.  Vietnam has a long and generally sparsely 
populated land borders with China, Laos, and Cambodia, 
making it easy for traffickers to evade border detection. 
Resources, rugged terrain, and a long-standing border 
dispute with Cambodia also limit the GVN's border monitoring 
efforts.  Land border posts lack computer equipment and 
often do not have telephones or radios. 
 
¶H.  The Prime Minister issued a directive in 1997 
instructing specific ministries (listed in B above) to 
combat trafficking of women and children overseas and 
assigning them specific responsibilities.  While this 
arrangement has produced results (see 23. G), observers 
inside and outside the GVN note there is room for further 
improvement.  The directive designated MOLISA as the focal 
point; for a time it appeared that this gave MOLISA policy 
leadership, but in practice, this did not happen.  MOLISA 
was generally unresponsive to efforts to broaden the focus 
beyond trafficking in women and children for the purpose of 
sexual exploitation.  Rather than fostering comprehensive, 
coordinated interagency work, MOLISA appeared to favor an 
approach that ensured that all agencies worked only in their 
special areas of competency.  In particular, MOLISA was said 
to resist working with the MOJ, which was charged by the 
Prime Minister with drafting laws and regulations on 
trafficking.  MOJ and other GVN entities have exhibited a 
broader approach to trafficking; MOLISA has now also begun 
to show interest in a more flexible and coordinated 
approach.  MOJ, with support from the National Assembly, has 
begun studying possible legislation and policy changes on 
trafficking in persons.  The MPS has actively enforced 
existing laws on trafficking in women and children.  The 
Border Guards exercised responsibility for receiving and 
repatriating returning victims.  Other GVN entities have 
worked with MOLISA on prevention and rehabilitation.  (Note: 
This problem of inter-ministerial cooperation is not limited 
or unique to trafficking issues. End note) 
 
The GVN is conducting a five-year evaluation report of the 
Prime Minister's 1997 decree on combating trafficking in 
women and children.  MPS sources stated that one of the 
recommendations of the evaluation will be more clearly to 
assign a GVN entity to be in charge of overall efforts to 
combat trafficking.  Other sources said that this 
organization could be a Deputy Prime Minister-led 
interministerial steering committee.  Another possibility 
would be to add responsibility for trafficking to an 
existing interministerial steering committee responsible for 
prostitution, illegal drugs, and HIV/AIDS. 
 
The GVN and the CPV have concentrated considerable attention 
on the problem of corruption.  While the GVN does not have a 
specific anti-corruption task force, such a body does exist 
within the CPV.  The largest corruption-related trial in SRV 
history, centered on an organized crime gang in Ho Chi Minh 
City, began on February 25, 2003.  In all, 155 persons were 
indicted, including two Central Committee members (one a 
Deputy Minister of Public Security and another the head of 
Voice of Vietnam Radio), as well as the second-ranking 
prosecutor in Vietnam and over a dozen lower ranking law 
enforcement officials.  Charges include murder, bribery, 
gambling, drug trafficking, alien smuggling, and extortion. 
Even before the trial began, the CPV and GVN stripped the 
two Central Committee members from their party and 
governmental posts. 
 
The GVN agreed to accept Swedish ODA for an anti-corruption 
project in September 2002, the first time the GVN has 
allowed foreigners directly to address the subject. 
 
Post's contacts almost uniformly indicate that corruption 
facilitates trafficking, but reject the notion that 
corruption drives trafficking or that trafficking is 
actually encouraged by GVN officials. 
 
¶I.  The GVN has been an active participant in multinational 
and international conferences on trafficking and related 
issues where trafficking is discussed.  In 2001, the GVN 
sent a delegation to the Second World Congress against the 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in Yokohama.  In 
February 2002, Vietnam was represented at the Vice Foreign 
Minister level at the regional conference on People 
Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons in Bali, Indonesia. 
The UNDP and ILO regional anti-trafficking projects both 
contain components intended to improve regional cooperation 
on this issue, and the GVN officials working in this area 
support these efforts.  GVN officials working on trafficking 
visited China in 2001 and visited Cambodia in March 2002 to 
share information and improve cooperative efforts to 
prevent, monitor, and control trafficking.  GVN officials 
participated in UNICEF-sponsored meetings with their Chinese 
counterparts in March and November 2002 to increase cross- 
border law enforcement cooperation on trafficking in 
persons.  Law enforcement officials on the border meet 
regularly with their Chinese counterparts to exchange 
information and coordinate activities. 
 
¶J.  As noted in 16. G, the GVN has developed a five-year 
plan of action for 2001-2005 against prostitution that 
addresses some trafficking-related problems.  A one-year 
progress report will be available soon.  MOLISA is also 
discussing a more specific plan of action against 
trafficking.  This plan could dovetail with creation of new 
working group on trafficking in persons.  (See 17. H.) 
However, MOLISA has not yet consulted several other 
ministries, including the MOJ, and will need them to weigh 
in.  Nonetheless, some observers predict that the plan could 
be completed by the end of 2003. 
 
¶K.  MOLISA is responsible for prevention and rehabilitation 
policies, MPS and the Supreme People's Procuracy for law 
enforcement and prosecution, and MOJ for legislation. 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Defense also 
have roles, as do some smaller government entities. 
 
¶18.  Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers: 
 
¶A.  Article 119 of the Criminal Code prohibits and 
prescribes punishment for trafficking in women; Article 120 
prohibits and prescribes punishment for trafficking in 
children.  There is no law that specifically prohibits 
trafficking in men; however, Chapter VI, Article 24, 
Paragraph 1 of Decree No. 152/1999/ND-CP could be used to 
discipline traffickers who recruit or send men abroad to 
work for "illegitimate profits" or illegal purposes.  In 
severe cases, this decree contemplates criminal punishment 
but does not set out a specific sentence for such a crime. 
Save the Children recently published a comparative study on 
the legal provisions of Mekong sub-region countries on 
trafficking in women and children, and noted that, according 
to Vietnamese law, "offenders" must have "traded" victims. 
It also reported that Vietnam's law does not "deem that the 
offense of human trafficking can be committed even with the 
victim's consent," as do the laws of Cambodia and Thailand. 
Therefore, Vietnamese anti-trafficking laws may not include 
cases where the victim went willingly, but, for instance, 
later was unable to leave, or was placed in debt bondage. 
In practice, GVN authorities nonetheless seem to treat at 
least some such cases as trafficking anyway.  For instance, 
MPS is investigating persons who allegedly tricked women 
into going to Malaysia in 2002 under the aegis of labor 
export, only to find themselves forced into prostitution. 
 
The GVN revised its Marriage and Family law in 2002 to curb 
abuse of marriage, recognition of parents and children, or 
adoption for the purpose of selling, buying or exploitation 
of for labor, sexual or other commercial purposes (Ref C). 
While much of the new law aimed at tightening up 
international adoption procedures, it adds another measure 
to prosecute some human traffickers and prohibits private 
marriage brokerage services that have been used as a 
mechanism for trafficking to Taiwan and elsewhere. 
 
The GVN also tightened up regulations on labor exports (Ref 
D), another mechanism that has been exploited for 
trafficking.  Companies are now required to have 7 billion 
VN dong (about US$455,000) in registered capital, have at 
least seven managers with tertiary education and foreign 
language abilities, have their own training facilities and 
connections to an independent training facility, and provide 
workers training, according to explicit GVN requirements. 
The GVN is reviewing contracts between workers and labor 
export companies and has reduced fees that companies can 
charge to workers.  It has also mandated training for 
company managers and representatives in relevant host 
country and Vietnamese laws.  The GVN is continuing to 
review its labor export programs to tighten them up further. 
 
The GVN is also studying the legal changes required to 
ratify and implement the Optional Protocol Against 
Trafficking in Women and Children of the TNOC. 
 
¶B.  The penalties for trafficking in women are 2-7 years in 
prison, with heavier sentences of 5-20 years for more 
serious crimes involving organized criminal activity 
(literally, "in an organized manner"), trafficking abroad, 
trafficking more than one person, or a repeat offence.  The 
penalties for trafficking in children are 3-10 years, with 
heavier sentences of 10-20 years or life for more serious 
crimes involving organized criminal activity, trafficking 
abroad, for "despicable or inhuman" purposes, for 
prostitution, for trafficking more than one child, or a 
repeat offense.  No changes were made in 2002. 
 
¶C.  The penalty for rape is 2-7 years imprisonment, or 5-10 
years if it involves a victim age 16-18.  If it involves 
organized criminal activity, gang rape, a repeat offense, 
incest, or multiple victims, as well as if it results in 31%- 
60% impairment of the victim, or if she is impregnated, the 
penalty is 7-15 years.  Rape can be a capital offense if the 
victim commits suicide as a result, is infected with HIV, or 
is left more than 61% impaired.  Rape of a child 13-16 years 
old results in a 7-15 year sentence.  Any sexual intercourse 
with a child under 13 years of age is considered rape; the 
offender can be sentenced to 12 years to life or to death. 
If the rape of a child 13-16 involves incest, a ward of the 
offender, results in 31-60% impairment of the victim, or 
impregnating the victim, the sentence is 12-20 years.  If 
the rape of a child 13-16 years old involves organized 
criminal activity, a repeat offense, gang rape, impairment 
greater that 61%, commission of a crime when the offender 
knows he is HIV positive, or leads to the suicide of the 
victim, the punishment is 20 years to life or death.  No 
changes were made in 2002. 
 
¶D.  See the statistics listed in the overview section 
concerning court cases.  Unfortunately, these data are not 
disaggregated according to numbers arrested and indicted. 
Post has no information concerning the number of 
convictions, although we presume it is high based on usual 
judicial practice.  Nor has the GVN made available 
information on the penalties actually applied to those 
convicted.  UNODCP has discussed the possibility of 
collecting crime statistics in an Office on Crime Statistics 
in the Supreme People's Procuracy. 
 
¶E.  See 16. F.  MPS Criminal Police have reported that they 
have detected increasing organized crime involvement in 
trafficking in persons, but such criminal groups appear to 
be specialized cells with informal links to other groups. 
Most of them are not transnational in nature, but some have 
used travel agencies, employment services, and marriage 
brokerage services as fronts.  Based on this concern, the 
GVN outlawed private marriage brokerage services during 
¶2002.  The GVN also reviewed and tightened licensing 
requirements for overseas employment services.  IOM reports 
that anecdotal evidence suggests traffickers are often 
individual brokers, who link up with more organized groups 
outside Vietnam.  DEA confirms that most Vietnamese 
traffickers are independent agents or working in small 
unorganized groups.  There is little evidence that GVN 
officials are actively involved in trafficking.  There is 
little or no information on where profits from trafficking 
in persons are being channeled. 
 
¶F.  The GVN actively investigates cases of trafficking that 
come to its attention.  GVN authorities have worked with 
foreign law enforcement officials, including the INS and the 
Australian Federal Police, to investigate and interdict 
trafficking cases, including fraudulent adoptions. 
According an INS official in Vietnam, this cooperation has 
progressed so that not only do GVN officials react to tips 
and queries, but also seek advice and collaboration on 
suspected cases.  Cooperation continued to improve in 2002. 
However, GVN authorities apparently do not pursue detection 
of trafficking in persons with the same intensity as they do 
other crimes, such as narcotics trafficking, that appear to 
them more clearly to threaten their national interests.  In 
large part, this is because the magnitude of the problem is 
not, in the authorities' judgment, great enough to warrant 
the resources such an effort would require. 
 
Vietnamese law enforcement does not use special 
investigative techniques in trafficking investigations.  The 
GVN takes the position that such techniques are not 
specifically authorized under Vietnamese law.  In November 
2000, the GVN changed the law to permit the use of such 
techniques, but only for narcotics investigations, effective 
June 1, 2001. 
 
¶G.  The limited training for GVN officials on investigation 
of trafficking in persons has been given primarily to border 
guards. 
 
¶H.  Yes.  GVN authorities work closely with countries within 
the INTERPOL and ASEANPOL frameworks.  Vietnam has entered 
into bilateral agreements with China and Australia 
concerning cooperation in combating crimes including 
trafficking in woman and children.  Significant cooperation 
has yet to materialize with China, although observers state 
both sides genuinely appear to be working toward that goal. 
Vietnam also cooperates bilaterally with a number of its 
neighbors via anti-crime agreements, extradition treaties, 
and mutual criminal justice assistance undertakings, all of 
which could apply to pursuing trafficking cases.  The GVN 
also works with a number of international organizations, 
such as UNICEF, UNDP, and ECPAT, to increase protection 
provided to women and children. 
 
¶I.  Post is not aware of that Vietnam has been asked to 
extradite persons charged with trafficking in other 
countries, whether third country nationals or its own 
citizens.  Vietnamese law does not prohibit extradition of 
its own nationals. 
 
¶J.  See 16. H. 
 
¶K.  The GVN and the CPV have formally made fighting official 
corruption a priority.  (See 17. H.)  Despite increasingly 
high profile prosecutions, Vietnam's anti-corruption 
campaign is not yet highly credible, comprehensive, or 
effective.  Contacts in and out of the GVN, as well as some 
media reports, indicate that individual low- and mid-level 
officials have at times facilitated trafficking.  There are 
anecdotal reports of GVN officials caught and tried for 
involvement in trafficking cases, but Post has no systematic 
or detailed information to substantiate such reports.  MOJ 
officials noted four such cases in 2002, but admitted that 
their knowledge is incomplete.  Certainly, as in other areas 
involving corrupt officials, more can and should be done 
systematically to pursue and prevent cases of official 
involvement. 
 
¶L.  Vietnam ratified Convention 182 on November 17, 2000. 
 
Vietnam is studying the steps necessary to ratify ILO 
Conventions 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory labor. 
 
Vietnam has ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention 
on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child 
Prostitution, and Child Pornography. 
 
Vietnam is studying the necessary legal and systematic 
changes to sign and implement the Optional Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, 
Especially Women and Children of the TNOC. 
 
¶19.  Protection and Assistance to Victims: 
 
¶A.   The GVN provides assistance to some victims of 
trafficking.  The Women's Union and CPFC have established 
rehabilitation programs to help treat, counsel, and 
reintegrate trafficking victims, and receive some 
international technical and financial support.  (Note:  The 
USG funds IOM assistance to several such centers. The USG- 
funded ILO-IPEC Child Labor project includes a small rescue 
initiative aimed at trafficked children in urban areas. End 
note)  These organizations clearly want to expand their 
efforts, but have only limited domestic funding. 
Independent GVN agencies like the CPFC are seriously under- 
funded.  Mass organizations, like the Women's Union, 
typically must generate most of their own funds through 
dues, economic activities, or securing funding from foreign 
organizations.  Therefore, the CPFC and the Women's Union 
will likely continue to seek additional domestic and foreign 
funding to pursue victim protection, rehabilitation, and 
reintegration.  Services provided (for some returnees from 
Cambodia and China) included temporary shelter, vocational 
training, small loans to start businesses, medical 
treatment, and sometimes counseling.  As part of its planned 
anti-trafficking project, the Asia Foundation will work with 
the MOJ's Legal Assistance Department to provide legal 
counseling to trafficking victims. 
 
However, some GVN officials tend to focus on engaging in 
prostitution as a "social evil" rather than viewing the 
prostitutes as victims. 
 
¶B.   The GVN and mass organizations such as the Women's 
Union have provided in-kind assistance to rehabilitation 
projects funded by international donors.  Generally, 
assistance flows the other way, from foreign NGOs and donors 
to GVN entities. In general, the GVN's and mass 
organizations' in-kind contributions include human resources 
and logistical support and occasionally office space.  The 
Women's Union has used some of its own resources to fund 
prevention and victim rehabilitation work, but generally 
waits until the international funding is no longer available 
and then uses its very limited funds to sustain the efforts. 
 
¶C.   In general, the GVN seeks to assist trafficking 
victims, and it does not generally treat victims as 
criminals.  Sometimes victims are prosecuted because of 
engagement in prostitution, but as noted above, prosecution 
usually is focused on women who voluntarily engage in 
commercial sex related activities.  In Vietnam, those found 
guilty of engaging in prostitution are not jailed with 
criminals.  Rather, MOLISA runs 40-plus facilities, commonly 
referred to as rehabilitation or re-education centers, where 
prostitutes receive medical treatment, vocational training, 
and "improved social values."  Generally, those caught 
engaging in prostitution -- voluntarily or as victims of 
trafficking -- are sent to these centers for 3 months to 1 
year, and they are not free to leave until the designated 
term is up.  MOLISA officials have pointed out that many 
choose to stay well beyond these periods because they do not 
want to return to prostitution but are uncertain of their 
ability to support themselves outside or are hesitant to 
return to their home communities.  They also noted that the 
vast majority voluntarily engaged in commercial sex work. 
While some GVN officials appeared aware that trafficked 
women, by contrast, did not enter prostitution voluntarily 
and are victims, GVN officials have justified the obligatory 
terms such victims can be required to spend in such centers 
on public health grounds, saying that 80% of prostitutes 
entering these centers are infected with one or more 
sexually transmitted diseases and must be treated. 
 
While no outside experts with whom emboffs have had contact 
believe that these camps are effective, much less 
appropriate, for victims of trafficking, experts have 
pointed out that no commercial sex workers are imprisoned 
under GVN policy.  Nor do they have criminal records. 
Trafficking victims are not immediately returned to their 
communities, where they would likely be treated as outcasts 
and run the risk of being trafficked again.  The experts 
would much prefer to see more victims' assistance programs, 
such as those run by the Women's Union and the CPFC.  The 
experts noted that the more experience GVN authorities have 
with victim's assistance programs, the more the authorities 
prefer to put trafficking victims into such programs.  But 
without sufficient funds to expand these programs, GVN 
authorities have few alternatives to the above-mentioned 
institutions. 
 
¶D.   We are not aware whether victims are encouraged to 
assist in the investigation or prosecution of cases. 
Technically, victims have a number of means to seek civil 
action against their traffickers.  There are also means for 
victims to pursue criminal action.  Vietnamese law expressly 
requires criminal offenders to compensate their victims. 
Post is not aware of any case in which a victim's access to 
such legal redress has been impeded.  (See 18. A. for 
efforts to provide legal assistance to victims.)  Experts 
have observed that trafficking victims are often reluctant 
to speak to police about the crimes committed against them, 
however.  NGOs have received commitments from the Women's 
Union and MPS's Criminal Police to receive training for 
community-level personnel in interviewing techniques to 
encourage victims to report crimes that they might be 
unwilling to speak about. 
 
¶E.   The GVN, in concert with NGOs, provides some shelter, 
such as temporary housing, for some returnees from China and 
Cambodia.  Article 19 of the Criminal Procedure Code allows 
a closed trial when necessary to protect victims' privacy, 
but there are no other legal protections for victims or 
witnesses.  We are not aware of any case of a witness being 
threatened. 
 
¶F.   Some GVN officials receive training on how to assist 
victims.  However, because training funding is scarce, the 
achievements of such training are limited.  Vietnamese 
embassies and consulates abroad are charged with the 
protection of Vietnamese citizens in their jurisdictions. 
The GVN continues to seek to expand training to foreign 
embassy and consulate personnel. 
 
¶G. Yes, the GVN provides assistance to victims as described 
above. 
 
¶H.   Radda Barnen (Save the Children-Sweden) and Save the 
Children-UK work on public education, advocacy, and 
assistance to trafficked children.  CARE and Family Health 
International help provide assistance to trafficked persons 
who have HIV.  The Asia Foundation initiated an anti- 
trafficking project and has applied for G/TIP funding to 
expand it to other provinces in Vietnam.  While not NGOs, 
IOM, ILO, UNDP, UNODCP, and UNICEF are actively providing 
assistance to the GVN in trafficking in persons, some of 
which is supported through USG funding.  A domestic quasi- 
NGO, the Center for Reproductive and Family Health, works in 
the prevention and victims' assistance areas and is actively 
soliciting international funds to do more.  As with all NGO 
and international donor activities in Vietnam, cooperation 
with local officials depends on long, patient relationship 
building.  Several organizations, such as IOM, have 
succeeded in identifying and developing close working 
contacts with key community leaders, such as Women's Union 
representatives in key border provinces. 
 
End response to questions. 
Burghardt