This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 000659 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
CAIRO FOR POL -- J. MAXSTADT 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/09/2013 
TAGS: PHUM PREL PGOV MOPS EPET ASEC CASC PINS NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: NAVY MINISTER SAYS MILITARY MUST TAKE 
STRONG STAND IN THE DELTA 
 
 
REF: ABUJA 236 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY AMBASSADOR HOWARD F. JETER; REASONS 1.5 (B) 
AND (D). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: During a March 27 meeting with Ambassador 
Jeter, Minister of State for Defense (Navy) Chris Agbobu 
discussed the recent violence in Delta State.  He 
attributed the fighting to political power struggles 
between the Ijaw and Itsekiri ethnic groups, Ijaw 
dissatisfaction with Delta State Governor James Ibori, and 
Ijaw illegal oil bunkering.  Agbobu claimed Ijaw "youth" 
used money from illegal bunkering to acquire small arms and 
some heavy weapons.  These weapons and the overall weakness 
of the military and police forces in Delta State have 
emboldened the militants.  Agbobu believed only a show of 
force by the military would resolve the matter.  He 
suggested the navy hold "exercises" to demonstrate the 
GON's power to impose peace in the region as a way to push 
the Ijaws toward dialogue.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
--------------------- 
VIOLENCE IN THE DELTA 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  (C) During a March 27 meeting with Ambassador Jeter, 
Minister of State for Defense (Navy) Chris Agbobu discussed 
the causes of and possible solutions to the recent violence 
in Delta State.  Agbobu described the causes of the 
violence as "two fronts."  First, long-standing disputes 
between Ijaw and Itsekiri over the creation of new Local 
Government Areas (LGAs) had created friction between the 
two ethnic groups.  The situation has been further inflamed 
by Delta State Governor James Ibori's support for the 
creation of new LGAs, favoring the Itsekiri. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) The second, and perhaps most important cause, 
according to Agbobu, is Ijaw oil bunkering.  Agbobu claimed 
the Ijaw used their illicit profits to purchase weapons. 
Agbobu did not know the source of the weapons, but 
hypothesized they were being shipped into Nigeria on the 
very same ships that smuggled the bunkered oil out. 
Calling the Ijaw "terrorists," Agbobu said their attacks on 
the Itsekiri were designed to divert the GON's 
military/police task force in Delta State from the Ijaw's 
illegal bunkering. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Lamenting the condition of the Navy and that Ijaw 
fighters were often better armed than the military, Agbobu 
said only a show of force by the military would deter the 
Ijaw's continued aggression.  He suggested that the 
military conduct "exercises" to demonstrate that the GON 
could impose peace in the region if militants did not 
submit to government authority.  Agbobu complained that 
Obasanjo's ultimatum to local combatants that they 
immediately cease all attacks and hand over those guilty of 
perpetrating prior violence was merely "Abuja talk."  "How 
would the President enforce the ultimatum," Agbobu asked? 
Agbobu said the President should refit the Navy and supply 
soldiers and police with the tools they need to combat 
lawlessness in the Delta. 
 
 
---------------------------------- 
U.S. SECURITY ASSISTANCE AND BENUE 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5.  (U) Turning to U.S. security assistance, the Ambassador 
told Agbobu that the suspension of the IMET and FMF 
portions of the U.S./Nigeria Defense Cooperation program 
had nothing to do with the GON's position on the war in 
Iraq.  The Ambassador explained the funds were withdrawn 
because the GON had not made sufficient progress in 
bringing to justice those responsible for the October 2001 
civilian massacre at Zaki-Biam, Benue State. 
 
 
¶6.  (C) Agbobu said U.S. assistance was the "bedrock of 
reforming the Ministry of Defense" and he was sorry to see 
the program diminished.  While Agbobu accepted that the 
assistance suspension had nothing to do with Iraq, he was 
quick to criticize the U.S. position on Benue.  Agbobu 
spoke emotionally about the killing and mutilation of the 
19 soldiers that precipitated the massacre in Benue.  He 
expressed great concern that no one seemed to care about 
the fate of the soldiers.  Driving his point home, the 
Minister said, "If I were President (Zaki-Biam) would have 
been erased." 
 
 
¶7.  (C) Agbobu said he did not think the soldiers at Zaki- 
Biam acted with the sanction of higher command.  He 
believed after seeing what happened to their comrades, the 
soldiers did not need orders to act.  Discussing the status 
of the GON's investigation into the Benue incident, Agbobu 
said the military would overthrow President Obasanjo if he 
indicted any officer for his role in the massacre. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Agbobu's influence in the military may not be as 
great as his position implies.  He is a political appointee 
selected to insure ethnic balance in the MOD.  However, his 
opinions on both the Delta and Benue are probably 
representative of opinions both in the military hierarchy 
and the rank-and-file.  END COMMENT. 
JETER