This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000736 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, DRL/HRDF 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KSEP EAID CE LTTE
SUBJECT:  HRDF Grants:  Proposal for removal of 
unexploded ordnance from urban areas 
 
Ref:  State 79965 
 
¶1.  Per Reftel, Mission is submitting a proposal to 
remove unexploded ordinance (UXO) from urban areas in 
the north of Sri Lanka.  Background for and description 
of the UXO proposal follow. 
 
¶2.  BACKGROUND:  In support of the USG's pro-peace 
process and humanitarian agenda in Sri Lanka, Mission is 
currently overseeing the second deployment of a Quick 
Reaction Demining Force (QRDF) to Jaffna in northern Sri 
Lanka.  The Jaffna Peninsula was extensively mined and 
experienced intense warfare during the past twenty years 
of conflict.  Since the government and Liberation Tigers 
of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) peace process began in December 
2001, over 300,000 displaced persons have returned to 
their home communities.  The majority of those returning 
have points of origin in the Jaffna district. 
 
¶3.  In response to this influx of displaced persons, the 
international community, including the United States, is 
donating extensively to landmine clearing operations. 
During the past few months, however, Mission has heard 
that individual unexploded ordinance (UXO) pieces spread 
throughout Jaffna Peninsula are not being destroyed. 
Evidence indicates that the UXOs are now injuring and 
killing more people than are mines.  The GSL and UNDP 
are collecting reports on where the UXOs are, but they 
have no mechanism to dispose of them. 
 
¶4.  PROPOSAL:  Mission recommends using elements of the 
current demining capacity in Sri Lanka to focus on the 
UXOs that are in the populated areas of Jaffna 
Peninsula.  A team will be deployed to go to the various 
identified locations to remove and destroy UXOs.  The 
team will be led by one demining expert and will have a 
minimum of two locally trained staff.  One vehicle will 
be rented or purchased locally.  Safety equipment that 
is currently being used for demining operations will 
also be used for this program.  Oversight of the project 
will be through one of the organizations currently 
conducting demining operations in Jaffna. 
 
¶5.  (((Note:  Mission notes that Para 5 of the Reftel 
states that funds "should not be awarded to U.S. or 
third-country NGOs for administration."  Sri Lanka does 
not have a domestic demining capacity outside of its 
military.  The only NGOs involved with demining, such as 
"OneSriLanka," administer funds through international 
demining organizations.  Mission is prepared to use 
local NGOs to oversee the application of the funds, but 
for cost effectiveness recommends working with the 
demining organizations directly.))) 
 
¶6.  LONG-TERM SUSTAINABILITY:  The greatest cost in the 
program is the start up of the project.  After the U.S.- 
sponsored USD 50,000 program is started, the cost of 
maintaining the team drops dramatically.  Demining 
organizations and NGOs in the Jaffna area have expressed 
confidence that they will be able to maintain funding 
for the program after its 3-4 month window concludes. 
 
¶7.  Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS