This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KUWAIT 003186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, JULY 12-16: FORMATION OF NEW 
GOVERNMENT; ISLAMIZATION; STUDENT VISAS 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: The composition of the new Kuwaiti Council of 
Ministers (Cabinet) has generated considerable criticism. 
Despite a reported seven new ministers, the government is 
seen by a substantial cross section of opinion (ranging from 
liberals to the Islamist Salafi Movement) as mediocre, with 
one writer commenting, "If this is the government we have, 
we're heading for crisis." Some prominent Islamists and 
liberals, however, still evince optimism that the separation 
of the post of prime minister from that of crown prince will 
bring about political reforms. 
 
All newspapers report calls by leading Islamists for the 
"Islamization of laws and the implementation of Sharia." A 
liberal writer attacks statements made this week by an 
Islamist MP that the Ministry of Education should not be 
given to someone "Westernized." 
 
One daily published letters from readers complaining that 
"stringent" American visa procedures "deprive students of 
the chance to study in Uncle Sam's land." END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: On July 15, all newspapers lead with news 
of the announcement the new Council of Ministers (Cabinet), 
selected by Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad and 
appointed by the Amir. Reports indicate that of the fourteen 
ministers selected (with one portfolio, Social Affairs, 
still unassigned), five are members of the ruling family, 
down from seven in the last government, and only one elected 
MP was selected, down from four previously. Seven of the 
fourteen ministers served in the last government. 
 
All newspapers report the merging of the Ministries of Oil 
and of Electricity and Water into a new Ministry of Energy 
headed by former acting Minister of Oil, Sheikh Ahmad Al- 
Fahad Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah. 
 
Al-Seyassah reports that businessmen in Kuwait are 
"optimistic" about the selection of Abdullah Al-Taweel as 
Minister of  Commerce and Industry, seeing him as "rational" 
and "unpredujiced." 
 
The Islamist Salafi Movement issued a statement on the new 
government calling it "weak and below the citizen's 
expectations," reports Al-Rai Al-Aam. Al-Qabas reports that 
Abdullah Al-Nibari, the Secretary General of the Kuwait 
Democratic Forum, hopes the new government is less 
"destructive" than its predecessor, but feels it is "below 
our expectations." 
 
All newspapers report calls by Islamist leaders for the 
"Islamization of laws and the implementation of Sharia." Al- 
Watan reports that the Secretary General of the Popular 
Islamic Salafi Group, Khalid Sultan Al-Issa, said the 
group's agenda also includes "protecting Islamic charities 
from foreign intervention" and "protecting of society from 
Westernization." 
 
Jassem Bin Sultan Al-Yaseen, Chairman of Charitable 
Committees at the Social Reform Society, wrote in Al-Watan 
on July 12 that due to importance of young people in the 
parliamentary elections, the Islamic movement must "pay 
attention to youth and involve them in political 
activities." 
 
Al-Qabas reports on July 16 that "informed legal sources" 
reject of questioning of the integrity of the recently 
completed electoral process. 
 
On the "Public Comment" page of Al-Qabas on July 12, several 
readers expressed frustration at "stringent" American visa 
procedures that "deprive large numbers of Kuwaiti government 
scholarship students of the ability to study in Uncle Sam's 
land." 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "A New Government Without Anything New" 
Salah Al-Mudahf wrote in independent Al-Qabas (7/16): "It is 
obvious that the new government is comprised of the same 
faces and mentalities. With all due respect to the Cabinet 
members, I believe that some of them do not meet the 
requirements of the twenty-first century. Kuwait needs young 
and active figures that are capable of foresight." 
 
¶4.  "A Government on the Road to Crisis" 
Salwa Al-Saeed wrote in independent Al-Seyassah (7/15):  "We 
expected a government that is capable of addressing major 
reforms. We expected an extraordinary government that could 
market its projects and communicate with the people. 
Unfortunately, some of the members of the new government 
have no grasp of reality and have no interest in domestic 
challenges. The new government lacks decision makers and 
influential figures. If this is the government we have, then 
we are heading towards a crisis." 
 
¶5.  "The Appointed Prime Minister" 
Abdelatif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas (7/15): 
"In light of the formation of the new Prime Minister and the 
manner adopted to select the Cabinet members, one can expect 
no significant changes in running the country.  Shiekh Sabah 
himself has confirmed this by stating that he will follow 
the footsteps of Sheikh Saad. Due to the problems we 
experienced in the past, we believe that we will continue 
through the same dark tunnel. We hope that we are wrong." 
 
¶6.  "The Enemies of Democracy" 
Liberal Director of Kuwait University's Center for Future 
and Strategic Studies, Dr. Shamlan Al-Essa wrote in 
independent Al-Seyassah (7/15): "Islamist MP Waleed Al- 
Tabtabaei called on Sheikh Sabah to alienate the liberals 
and the `Westernized' from the Ministries of Education and 
Information. What the Islamic powers are attempting to 
achieve is maintenance of the status quo, implementation of 
Islamic Sharia law and the Islamization of laws. The 
hegemony of the Islamic powers over the Ministry of 
Education has led to thousands of students graduating 
without the belief in creativity, which has led some instead 
to believe in Jihad." 
 
¶7.  "Towards a Popular Government and Full Supervision" 
Islamist MP Waleed Al-Tabtabaei wrote in independent Al- 
Watan (7/15): "The separation of the two positions [of Crown 
Prince and Prime Minister] represents a great step for 
Kuwait as it represents the breaking of a tradition that is 
not mentioned in the constitution. This action will help 
lead to the removal of other rigid traditions, such as 
limiting certain positions in the government to the Al-Sabah 
family, a provision also not also mentioned in the 
constitution. The separation of the two positions will also 
help in achieving full supervision of the MPs." 
 
¶8.  "The Separation of the Two Posts: A New Era" 
Dr. Shafiq Al-Ghabra wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(7/16): "It was tradition to appoint the Crown Prince as the 
Prime Minister to form a government, but this tradition has 
been broken because of Sheikh Saad's illness. This may open 
doors in the future to others from the Royal family [other 
than the Crown Prince] and qualified citizens to hold the 
position of Prime Minister. The separation may also pave the 
road for the public to occupy important posts in the 
government [as ministers]. This could be the beginning of 
the political reform in Kuwait. The appointment of Sheikh 
Sabah as Prime Minister may mean much for reform and the 
reformers." 
 
 
JONES