This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 002949 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/UBI, EUR/NCE, EUR/RPM, PM/RSAT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/24/2013 
TAGS: MCAP MARR PREL EZ NL NATO
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE TO DUTCH ON CZECH FIGHTER ACQUISITION 
 
REF: STATE 326262 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY POLITICAL COUNSELOR MARY DALY FOR REASONS 
1.5 (B AND D). 
 
 ¶1. (C) PolMilOff delivered reftel points to Dutch MFA 
Security Policy Bureau Arms Transfer Policy Chief Paul van 
den IJssel on November 25.  The Dutch are also focused on the 
issue, and Van den IJssel said they were contemplating phone 
calls at a "high political level" to the Czechs (perhaps by 
Defense Minister Kamp or State Secretary for Defense van der 
Knaap).  He said the GONL shares U.S. concerns about the 
interoperability problems posed by the JAS-39 Gripen.  Van 
den IJssel has instructed the Dutch Ambassador in Prague to 
approach the Czechs on the matter. 
 
¶2. (C) ODC rep also discussed this issue on November 25 with 
MOD officials working on the Dutch proposal for the Czechs. 
State Secretary of Defense van der Knaap (no. 2 in MOD) has 
signed a letter to Czech Defense Minister Kostelka on this 
issue (text follows in paragraph 3) to be hand-delivered by 
the Dutch Ambassador in Prague.  According to MOD source, van 
der Knaap has insisted that MOD's engagement be limited to 
this letter, in addition to  MFA's engagement in Prague. 
Apparently van der Knaap has instructed MOD Chief for 
Materiel RADM van Dord that he does not want MOD, including 
the Dutch DATT in Prague, taking action beyond the 
transmission of the letter as he wants to keep the Dutch 
"above the fray." 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Begin text of Dutch MOD State Secretary letter to 
Czech Defense Minister: 
 
"On October 30, 2003 the Netherlands presented an offer for 
the acquisition of a complete aircraft system and related 
services in order to meet the basic Czech requirements for 
airspace protection.  The Netherlands offer is based on 
providing the Czech Republic with 14 most modern Lockheed 
Martin F-16 aircraft, in the Mid Life Update configuration, 
currently in use by the Royal Netherlands Air Force. 
 
I would like to emphasize that the Netherlands Ministry of 
Defense, if requested, is willing to clarify this proposal, 
which has been prepared in close co-operation with the United 
States Air Force.  Furthermore I would like to underline the 
fact that several European Countries, which are united in the 
European Participating Air Forces (EPAF), are using the F-16 
aircraft.  Therefore the Netherlands offer further created 
possibilities for the Czech Republic to further exploit 
co-operation within Europe as well as within NATO. 
 
In addition, we welcome initiatives to deepen the existing 
long-term and broad relationship with the Czech Republic. 
Such a relationship, based upon common objectives and 
operational interests, will undoubtedly further strengthen 
our political and military partnership.  In that perspective, 
I hope that we can start a dialogue about the mutual benefits 
of co-operation of our armed forces." 
 
End text of Dutch letter. 
 
¶4. (C) MOD source noted that Dutch Embassy Washington had 
been briefed on this matter by USG officials on November 21. 
Source further advises that "Dutch (and U.S.) working level 
members of the sales team" have advised Czechs to take into 
account: 
 
-- the reliability of other competitors' claims of NATO 
interoperability not only in weapons support systems but also 
C4I capability; 
-- the support and maintainability of the F-16 versus other 
competitors' claims of support for their weapons systems 
being tried and tested; 
-- the importance of NATO interoperability in relation to 
Prague Capabilities Commitments, training, air defense 
tactics, etc.; 
-- the financing arrangements of the deal in contrast to 
other competitors' arrangements (follow-on possibilities) and 
that ownership (regarding maintenance and maintainability) 
brings a higher level of responsibility over the fleet than a 
leased arrangement, also that configuration management, 
support development, and the cost sharing arrangements 
existent among EPAF nations provide users with the clout with 
the defense industry that supports that effort. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment:  MOD sources advise that van der Knaap's 
hesitance to engage more openly on this issue is likely the 
result of his concern about being the subject of 
parliamentary backlash should the Dutch fail to win the 
competition.  (Van der Knaap has the lead in the GONL for 
selling off excess materiel such as F-16s, frigates and 
maritime patrol aircraft in the wake of Defense Minister 
Kamp's recently announced defense cuts.)  End comment. 
SOBEL