This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 004915 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR - GILROY, MCISAAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: DR PGOV
SUBJECT: FORMAL PACT: CIVIC LEADERS TO MONITOR DOMINICAN 
ELECTIONS 
 
 
¶1. (U) A ceremony including President Mejia, other 
presidential candidates, GODR officials, business and union 
leaders, and the diplomatic corps, held September 8 at the 
Catholic University in Santo Domingo, formally approved a 
non-government committee ("comision de seguimiento") of nine 
academic and business notables to monitor the preparation and 
execution of presidential elections scheduled for May 16. 
The committee was tasked with following the work of the 
Central Election Board (Junta Central Electoral - JCE) in 
organizing the elections and tallying results, to ensure "a 
free, transparent, 
credible, and participative electoral process, without 
distortions or irregularities."  The committee will be 
chaired by Catholic University Rector Monsignor Agripino 
Nunez Collado, who has served as a political mediator in 
previous campaigns. 
 
¶2. (U) President Mejia promised that his administration would 
&not place any obstacle to the success of the day of 
dialogue" and that "from the National Palace there will be no 
mischief of any sort" (with regard to the elections).  Local 
press ran photos of Mejia embracing one of his rivals for the 
PRD nomination, party president Hatuey De Camps, and shaking 
hands with former president and main political adversary 
Leonel Fernandez (PLD). 
 
¶3. (U) The meeting also approved a "declaration of 
commitments" by the same political parties, private sector 
groups, and other institutions which have been engaged since 
last October in a "national dialogue" to draft a national 
development agenda.  The declaration outlined objectives for 
political, institutional, electoral, economic, and social 
development.  Publication of the full agenda was promised for 
March, in time for it to be incorporated into the parties' 
platforms before the elections. 
 
¶4. (SBU) JCE President Luis Arias, in a subsequent 
conversation with the Ambassador (to be reported septel), 
said the ceremony had "contributed something" to reducing 
controversy and the monitoring committee would be able to 
verify that the JCE is doing its job properly.  Arias cited 
his "positive experience" with past election monitoring 
committees and recalled that business members had recruited 
computer experts for the JCE.  However, he warned that the 
committee's role "is not to supplant but to collaborate with" 
the JCE.  The Ambassador responded to Arias and later 
remarked to the press that the committee is a tremendous step 
forward for dialogue and transparency and will give the 
people more confidence in the electoral process and reduce 
tensions.  In a separate meeting, ex-president Fernandez 
agreed with the Ambassador that the new committee deserves 
support, but asserted that the JCE is "not trustworthy" 
(other topics septel). 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: The monitoring committee was launched amid 
rising concern over the fairness of the electoral process 
that will culminate in May.  It follows a 20-year tradition 
in the Dominican Republic of civic oversight of the electoral 
process.  Opposition parties such as the PLD (report septel) 
have criticized what they see as a heavily pro-PRD bias at 
the JCE, military meddling in the campaign, use of government 
resources to advance President Mejia's candidacy, and a 
possibility of violent demonstrations.  Mejia,s ambitions 
for reelection against the wishes of other PRD leaders and 
his dwindling popularity -- an effect of the nation's 
economic problems -- have fueled suspicion that the President 
will resort to chicanery.  The committee of notables will 
help to assuage these fears. (There are encouraging immediate 
precedents: Dominican elections since 1996 were judged by 
international observers to have been free of serious 
irregularities.) 
HERTELL