This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001975 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/08/2013 
TAGS: PTER MARR PREL YM SU EH COUNTER TERRORISM MARITIME SECURITY
SUBJECT: YEMEN SEEKS INCREASED COOPERATION WITH HOA TO 
DECREASE TERRORISM 
 
REF: SANAA 1814 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See paragraph 10. 
 
¶2. (c) Summary: Commander of the U.S. Combined Joint Task 
Force for the Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA), General Maston 
Robeson, met with the Yemeni Ministries of Defense, Foreign 
Affairs and Interior on August 4 to discuss American and 
Yemeni policy objectives in the Horn of Africa (HOA).  The 
ministers' comments largely focused on maritime security, the 
need to promote stability in Somalia and counter-terrorism 
cooperation, and were consistent with press reports of a ROYG 
campaign to increase cooperation in the Horn of Africa and 
the formation of a Yemen-Ethiopia-Sudan tripartite (reftel). 
Yemeni officials, concerned that terrorists are taking 
advantage of the transit routes used by the many immigrants 
landing on Yemen's unguarded coasts, are working with the 
U.S. to establish a fully functioning Coast Guard and to 
increase border security.  They anticipate regional 
cooperation will help increase domestic stability in HOA 
countries which will result in decreased migrant flows and 
stem some of the flow of terrorism.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Increased Border Security Required to Staunch 
Migrant/Terrorist Flow 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (c) On August 4, General Robeson met with Minister of 
Defense Abdullah Ali Aliawa, Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Abubaker Abdullah al-Qirbi, and Minister of Interior Rashad 
Mohammad Al-Alimi to discuss Yemen's role in increasing HOA 
cooperation in the fight against terror.  All three ministers 
conveyed similar messages.  With vast coastlines and porous 
borders with Saudi and Oman, border security remains an area 
of ROYG concern.  Since the resolution of border demarcation 
issues with Saudi Arabia, ROYG has turned its attention to 
maritime security along the southern and western coasts. 
There is specific concern about the Gulf of Aden and the "Bab 
al-Mandeb" Straits.  Chief of Staff Gassimi, who attended 
Robeson's meeting with the Defense Minister, believes the 
same vessels taking advantage of Yemen's unguarded coasts to 
smuggle people, goods, and possibly weapons, may be involved 
in the "bi-directional flow of terror across the Red Sea." 
 
¶4. (c) The ROYG is working with the U.S. to establish a fully 
functional Coast Guard by 2006, and holds monthly security 
meetings between the Ministries of Interior, Transportation, 
and other security officials to study ways to improve border 
security.  However, Minister of Defense Alaiwa said, "ROYG 
lacks the tools necessary to do more" including a radar 
system.  Robeson asked all three ministries if ROYG would be 
interested in "Safe Skies", a program designed to create 
region-wide radar coverage by increasing the level of radar 
technology at HOA airports.  FM Qirbi and Minister Alaiwa 
agreed to consider the program and requested additional 
information.  The Minister of Interior deferred to Ministry 
of Defense. 
 
¶5. (c) The Defense Minister also told Robeson that Yemen has 
good relations with Sudan, Kenya, and Ethiopia, but relations 
between Yemen and Eritrea remain strained (due in part to the 
dispute over the Hanish Islands), and that there is no 
central government in Somalia with whom the ROYG can work. 
He noted that Yemen is making overtures to increase economic, 
political, and security cooperation among HOA countries 
through the recent creation of a tripartite (Yemen, Ethiopia, 
and Sudan) commission and an invitation to other countries in 
the region with similar "principles and objectives" to join 
its efforts (reftel).  The ROYG is considering expanding the 
multilateral partnership to include Kenya, Tanzania, and/or 
Djibouti.  (Comment: This "open" invitation has been met with 
skepticism by Eritrean officials in Sana'a, who maintain that 
the sole purpose of the tripartite is to ensure Eritrea's 
isolation. End comment.) 
 
¶6. (c) Foreign Minister Qirbi called on General Robeson and 
the U.S. to facilitate greater regional cooperation to bring 
stability and security to HOA, thereby stanching the 
continuous flow of migrants to Yemen.  Robeson noted that the 
U.S. is already conducting training in Yemen, Eritrea, and 
Djibouti to provide local forces with the necessary skills to 
improve maritime security, and training in Sudan is scheduled 
to start soon.  He suggested that a regional exercise would 
be useful in promoting Yemen's efforts to increase maritime 
security. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Local Conflict Contributes to Regional Instability - 
Solving Somalia 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶7. (c) To succeed in the war on terror, Minister Qirbi 
believes the U.S. must do more to solve regional conflicts -- 
there is no government in Somalia, the Sudanese government is 
overwhelmed, and Ethiopia and Eritrea are still dealing with 
a border issue.  Qirbi said strong central governments need 
to be established, and domestic issues must be dealt with 
impartially and politically in order to achieve a 
comprehensive solution. 
 
¶8. (c) According the ministers, the ROYG,s goal in Somalia 
is to reduce external influences on internal Somali issues 
(for example, interference from Ethiopia and Eritrea) and to 
promote the establishment of a strong central government. 
Chief of Staff Gassimi expressed interest in the U.S. 
position on Somalia, asking which side the U.S. will 
recognize, and alluded to a failed ROYG attempt at mediation. 
 Undeterred by previous difficulties, the Minister of 
Interior said Yemen is preparing to send ROYG officials to 
Somalia in the near future as there are currently no Yemeni 
officials on the ground. 
 
----------------------------- 
Counter-terrorism Cooperation 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9. (c) The ministers were also united in their view that a 
lack of counter-terrorism cooperation makes HOA an attractive 
target for terrorists interested in exploiting its unguarded 
transit routes.  General Robeson was told in his meetings 
that President Saleh has raised this issue with Ethiopia, 
Djibouti and Kenya but, with the exception of the new 
tripartite venture, there is currently no multilateral 
initiative to address the issue. 
 
¶10. (c) Comment: ROYG officials responded well to Robeson's 
preliminary proposals for areas of future U.S.-Yemen 
cooperation and U.S.-HOA cooperation that might include 
Yemen.  They spoke about Yemen's approach to HOA and the 
reasons more regional cooperation is necessary with 
unexpected candor, and provided unusually detailed responses 
to General Robeson's questions.  The Yemen-Ethiopia-Sudan 
tripartite is evidence of HOA multilateralism at work and may 
prove the basis for a regional security initiative capable of 
deterring terrorist operations.  Having said this, the effort 
is still in its infancy and the details of how such a 
consortium might operate and its effectiveness are untested. 
Post will continue to engage with the host government and HOA 
representatives in Yemen to seek opportunities to influence 
the process in such a way that it promotes U.S. interests in 
regional stability.  Post also welcomes additional guidance 
and information from the Department or CENTCOM on U.S. 
programs in the HOA that could be expanded to include Yemen, 
specifically the "Safe Ships" initiative.  End comment. 
 
¶11. (u) Minimize considered. 
HULL