This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 001545 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/B 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/29/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER IZ YM DOMESTIC POLITICS
SUBJECT: YEMENI SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT'S INTERVIEW WITH 
AL-HAYAT 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull, for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
¶1.  (U)  Begin summary:  A recent interview with Speaker of 
Parliament Sheikh Abdullah bin Hussein al-Ahmar provides an 
illustrative example typifying the views of this prominent 
Yemeni political figure.  Al-Ahmar is known for his 
controversial ideas as demonstrated in a June 20 interview 
with London-based daily Al-Hayat in which he criticized the 
Arab response to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the 
situation in Iraq, condemned the Sharm-al-Sheikh and Aqaba 
summits and described the domestic political scene from his 
vantage point as leader of Yemen's second largest party. See 
biographic note in paragraph 8.  End summary. 
 
---------------------------- 
Palestinian-Israeli Conflict 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  In a 6/20 interview with the London-based daily 
Al-Hayat, Yemeni Speaker of Parliament Sheikh al-Ahmar 
denounced "Arab pressures on the Palestinian groups to stop 
the legitimate resistance against the Zionist occupation" and 
criticized the Roadmap.  He explained that Arab opposition to 
the Palestinian issue is the result of "defeat, internal 
fear, and the inability to say no to the occupation and 
Zionist terrorism."  Sheikh al-Ahmar condemned the 
Sharm-al-Sheikh and Aqaba summits because "they turned the 
resistance, martyrdom, and the jihad against Zionism into 
terrorism."  He asked "what dignity and value is left for the 
Arabs if they abandon the legitimacy of the Palestinian 
resistance?  How can they confront Israel with all its 
military capabilities and American support without the 
resistance?"  Al-Ahmar surmised that "martyrdom and the jihad 
card is the only thing left to confront Israel.  The Arabs 
should defend all the Palestinian factions in order to 
continue the free and legitimate resistance." 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶3.  (U)  Sheikh al-Ahmar blamed Arab states for the situation 
in Iraq saying that "had it not been for the green light from 
some Arab and Muslim states, the U.S wouldn't have invaded 
and occupied Iraq."  Al-Ahmar believes "Arab states are 
responsible for what is happening (in Iraq) after the fall of 
Saddam Hussein's regime under the pretext of the existence of 
weapons of mass destruction.  The Americans have no excuse 
anymore for slaughtering and annihilating the Iraqi people 
and destroying the country.  It is impermissible to remain 
silent over the massacres, violation of honor, desecration of 
land and holy site that is taking place now in Iraq." 
 
--------------- 
Domestic Issues 
--------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  Discussing domestic issues for the first since the 
April 27 parliamentary elections, al-Ahmar said that Yemen's 
political situation is "better than that of the other Arab 
countries despite the cracks and violation."  Commenting on 
President Saleh's recent decision to pardon 16 former ROYG 
officials living in exile, he declared that "President Saleh 
is known for his leniency and his care for all the sons of 
Yemen."  Al-Ahmar denied that he ever objected to or voiced 
any reservations about the pardon, saying that he has always 
supported "closing the pages of the past" for Yemen's 
interest and stability.  Sheikh al-Ahmar said that during the 
campaign for the April 27 parliamentary elections "the Islah 
alliance with the YSP and other opposition parties...under 
the umbrella of the Joint Meeting Parties was a natural 
phenomenon."  However, he admitted that he was not one of 
those who supported this experiment. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Al-Ahmar disclosed a tension between GPC and Islah 
"due to the violations, extortion, and pressure by the ruling 
party against Islah during the elections," but stressed that 
"this tension does not pose a danger to security and 
stability in Yemen."  He described it as a temporary 
disagreement that coincided with the elections and will not 
turn into ongoing confrontations.  Continuing, he added that 
had it not been for the Islah leadership's flexible and 
patient policy the elections could have been a catastrophe. 
Had the election been fair, which al-Ahmar asserted it was 
not, he believes Islah would have won twice as many seats. 
He added that YSP was expected to win the largest number of 
seats, but "the GPC worked to turn everything in its favor." 
 
¶6.  (U)  In the aftermath of the 4/27 elections, al-Ahmar 
said that although Prime Minister Ba Jammal's government was 
granted confidence by the majority of the ruling party MPs, 
there were those who questioned the new program, but "were 
afraid of being held accountable later if they blocked the 
vote of confidence."  Returning to the ROYG line, al-Ahmar 
re-affirmed his condemnation of all acts of terrorism and 
expressed his support for President Saleh's policies in 
combating terrorism and promoting security and stability in 
Yemen. 
 
-------------------- 
Comment and Bio Note 
-------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Begin comment:  The 70-year old Yemeni Speaker of 
Parliament is also the foremost sheikh of the Hashid tribe 
and chairman of Islah (an Islamist-oriented reform party and 
the second largest political party in Yemen).  His status as 
tribal leader, business leader and Speaker of Parliament 
allows al-Ahmar a prominent platform.  Sheikh al-Ahmar is 
well-known for his anti-U.S. rhetoric and, more recently, his 
opposition to the inclusion of female candidates in the 4/27 
parliamentary elections.  For him, the tribe and its 
authority are above everything else.  His comments to 
Al-Hayat are consistent with his conservative ideals, 
represent a broad spectrum of thought in Yemen and illustrate 
areas of continued tension between his followers and more 
moderate elements in Yemen.  End comment. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Begin bio note:  Sheikh al-Ahmar was born in the 
Amran governorate in 1933.  He was active in the national 
struggle against Imamite rule and was imprisoned in 1959 by 
the late Imam Ahmed.  (Imam Ahmed also executed al-Ahmar's 
father and brother.)  Al-Ahmar was released from prison after 
the 1962 revolution against the Imam, and led the Hashid 
tribes in defense of the revolution and the republic.  He was 
appointed as a member of the Presidential Council, formed 
after the 1962 revolution, and was Minister of Interior in 
three consecutive cabinets.  In 1969, al-Ahmar was elected 
Chairman of the National Council that was tasked with 
drafting the constitution, and in 1972 he was elected 
Chairman of the Shura Council.  After unification and the 
declaration of political pluralism, al-Ahmar called for the 
formation of the Islah party.  Al-Ahmar became the first 
Speaker of Parliament in 1993, and was re-elected in 1997, 
2000 and 2003.  Four of his sons are members of the newly 
elected parliament: two are Islahis, while the other two 
represent GPC (the ruling party).  End bio note. 
 
 
HULL