This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L COLOMBO 001630 
 
SIPDIS 
 
RSO FOR DS/IP/NEA/SA AND DS/DSS/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/19/2013 
TAGS: ASEC CE PTER
SUBJECT: COLOMBO EAC MEETING DATED 9/18/03 
 
REF: STATE 249843 
 
Classified by RSO Alex R. Moore - Reason: 1.5(D) 
 
¶1. (SBU) AmEmbassy Colombo EAC met on September 18 to discuss 
the upcoming Security Environmental Profile Questionnaire 
(SEPQ) due September 19.  EAC members in attendance were the 
AMB, DCM, RSO, ARSO, POL, PD, AID, CLO, ECON and IBB. 
 
¶2. (C) The EAC reviewed post's current threat ratings on the 
Security Environmental Threat List (SETL) and noted that 
Colombo was rated as HIGH for each category of Transnational 
Terrorism, Indigenous Terrorism, and Political Violence.  The 
EAC then discussed the current threat environment in relation 
to those ratings.  A number of points were made: 
 
- The peace process between the Sri Lankan Government and 
LTTE continues.  The ceasefire agreement reached in February 
2002 continues to largely hold. 
 
- The last LTTE suicide bombing in Colombo was October 2001, 
however, an estimated 40 political assassinations involving 
LTTE, Tamils and/or Muslims have occurred mostly in the 
northern and eastern provinces of Sri Lanka since the 
ceasefire. 
 
- LTTE has never renounced terrorism and remains a dangerous 
terrorist organization. 
 
- Tamil militants have only attacked American interests once 
in 1984 (when three AID contractors were kidnapped in 
Jaffna), but two American bystanders were injured in an Oct 
2000 suicide bomb attack near the Town Hall in Colombo, and 
other terrorist attacks have taken place in neighborhoods 
close to American residences. 
 
- It is not in its interest for the LTTE to attack Americans 
at this time, however, the indiscriminate nature of LTTE 
suicide bomb attacks have made it apparent Americans are 
always at risk should the LTTE renew a bombing campaign. 
 
- The EAC recognizes that its knowledge of transnational 
terrorism issues in Sri Lanka may  very well be incomplete. 
It also understands that American interests worldwide are at 
risk due to an ongoing transnational terrorist threat. 
However, absent any new information, the EAC assesses that 
current conditions in Sri Lanka would make a terrorist 
operation by an outside group difficult to implement.  This 
assessment is based on several factors, including the active 
intelligence capabilities of the Sri Lankan security services 
and a relatively small Muslim population (8 percent) that has 
demonstrated little capability or inclination to support 
Muslim extremist activities (although this is an issue the 
Embassy watches very closely).  We know of no firm link 
between the LTTE and Al Qaeda, nor do we believe the LTTE 
would allow any Muslim militant group to operate in areas 
that are under LTTE control. 
 
-  The last serious incident of political disturbance was Oct 
2002, when Muslim/Sinhalese rioting lasted for two days in 
extreme northern Colombo near the airport, resulting in a 
government-imposed three-day curfew.  A number of private 
homes were burned in the rioting, and the Embassy Warden 
System was activated as a result. 
 
- During the Afghanistan and Iraq conflicts, several 
non-violent demonstrations occurred, usually after Friday 
Mosque or the following Monday.  The Embassy did not appear 
to be specifically targeted, and police usually prevented the 
demonstrations from reaching the Embassy.  The one exception 
was March 28, 2003, in which a demonstration involving up to 
2,000 left wing JVP members and Muslims became unruly and 
police used tear gas when the crowd overran the designated 
boundaries. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Based on the information outlined above, the EAC 
will shortly send in its annual SEPQ responses on indigenous 
and transnational terrorism and political violence. 
LUNSTEAD