This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ACCRA 000559 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/18/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER GH
SUBJECT: GHANA CHOOSES PUBLIC SILENCE ON IRAQ 
 
REF: A. STATE 71798 (NODIS) 
 
     ¶B. STATE 70678 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Mary C. Yates, reason 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C)  Ambassador Yates delivered reftel B demarche on 
possible NAM involvement in a UNGA Special Session on Iraq to 
Foreign Minister Hackman Owusu-Agyemang on March 19. 
Ambassador stressed the counterproductive nature of any such 
session while the Security Council remains seized with the 
issue, and that the USG and its coalition partners had 
sufficient legal authority to disarm Iraq under several 
Security Council resolutions.  The Minister replied that 
Ghana was, "off the record," in sympathy with the USG on 
Iraq.  Given what he termed "national politics" and the 
tremendous pressure the GOG was under from various sources, 
NAM, Africa Group and others to oppose any intervention in 
Iraq, the GOG would not make any public statement on Iraq. 
 
¶2. (C)  Owusu-Agyemang noted the confusion in the local media 
over a false report of a call from the Presidency to the 
White House expressing support for USG actions to disarm 
Iraq.  There had been no such phone call made, he said. 
Additionally, in violation of the GOG's decision to remain 
silent publicly on Iraq, statements by a Presidency press 
spokesman stating that more time should have been given to UN 
inspectors had been repudiated by the Chief of Staff in later 
remarks to the press, he noted.  Owusu-Agyemang said that the 
local "anti-war machinery" was in "overdrive," and his 
government had to exercise caution.  However, in regard to 
any public demonstration that might threaten or impinge upon 
Mission activities (none are planned that this Mission is 
aware of), "it would be well contained." 
 
¶3. (C)  Ambassador also delivered reftel A demarche on Iraqi 
agents to the Foreign Minister, who pledged to communicate 
our concerns to GOG security forces "immediately."  The 
Ambassador thanked the Minister for the fine level of 
cooperation on security matters.  The Minister concluded by 
saying, "we recognize the depth of conviction of the United 
States on Iraq," and reaffirmed the GOG's cooperation on 
security matters.  He said he would be briefing the President 
this afternoon on the details of these demarches. 
YATES