This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 002171 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, INL/C/CJ, IO/T 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL SNAR CE
SUBJECT:  Colombo Plan:  Drug Awareness Program 
celebrates 30 years with award for INL Director 
 
Refs:  (A) State 328549; (B) Colombo 1990 
 
¶1.  On December 21, DCM and poloff attended a dinner 
commemorating the 30th anniversary of the Colombo Plan's 
Drug Awareness Program (DAP).  Since its inception in 
1973, the DAP has been a significant force throughout 
the Asia/Pacific region in demand reduction and drug 
awareness efforts, including in the areas of prevention, 
rehabilitation, and law enforcement.  The U.S., as a 
member of the Colombo Plan, is a major financial 
contributor to the DAP, providing USD 920,000 in FY2003 
alone. 
 
¶2.  During the anniversary dinner, Kittipan 
Kanjanapipatkul, Colombo Plan Secretary-General, and Tay 
Bian How, DAP director, took the opportunity to 
recognize the achievements of several individuals and 
groups for their drug awareness efforts.  Thomas Browne, 
Director of the Criminal Justice Program in the State 
Department's INL Crime Office (INL/C/CJ), was one of six 
awardees.  Browne received a "Special Award of 
Recognition" for his "distinguished service in efforts 
to combat the drug problem in the Asia/Pacific Region." 
Poloff accepted the award on Browne's behalf.  The 
award, certificate, and a copy of the DAP's 30th 
anniversary commemorative publication have been sent via 
pouch to INL. 
 
¶3.  The other five award recipients were: 
 
-- Ven. Kuppiyawatte Bodananda Thero, director of 
Mithuru-Mithuro, a Sri Lankan drug rehabilitation 
center. 
 
-- Lilla Dulay, Director of Preventive Education for the 
Philippines' Dangerous Drugs Board. 
 
-- The Royal Thai Foundation for its drug crop 
eradication programs. 
 
-- T.T. Ranganathan Clinical Research Foundation, a 
residential drug treatment center in Chennai, India. 
 
-- Singapore Anti-Narcotics Association. 
 
¶4.  Minimize considered. 
 
LUNSTEAD