This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000521 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/EX, S/CT, CA, DS/DSS, 
DS/IP/NEA, DS/DSS/ITA, DS/ICI/PII, CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/19/2013 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT PREL PTER AADP CASC YM EAC COUNTER TERRORISM
SUBJECT: (TFI201) SANAA EAC MEETING MARCH 19 
 
REF: A. SANAA 516 
     ¶B. SANAA 511 
     ¶C. SANAA 398 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
 ¶1.  (S/NF)  Begin Summary:  The Ambassador convened an 
Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meeting on March 19 to 
assess threat information in light of further information on 
the shooting incident at the Hunt Oil facility in Marib (refs 
a, b and septel) and the Iraq contingency.  Because the 
investigation into the Marib incident is ongoing, a 
determination of motive is premature (septel), as is a 
decision on any recommendation for authorized departure.  EAC 
members decided to go to the StandFast stance at close of 
business March 20, which means that the Embassy will be 
closed, American employees must remain at their assigned 
StandFast locations (Embassy, residence or Alternate Command 
Center) and only cleared FSNs are allowed at the Embassy (ref 
c).  Key offices and personnel represented at the meeting 
included: AMB, DCM, POL/ECON, CONS, ADMIN, PD, RSO, ORCA, 
OMC, SOC YEMEN and RMO. 
 
---------------------------- 
Update on Shootings in Marib 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Embassy investigative team in Marib is receiving 
good cooperation from the Yemeni authorities and are 
continuing their investigation.  Conflicting information 
about the perpetrator and an ongoing site visit to the crime 
scene mean that a motive is not yet determined.  The injured 
Canadian was medevaced March 19 after successful surgery on 
March 18 that left him in stable condition.  Embassy is 
providing assistance as needed.  Details reported septel. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Current Threat Information; 
StandFast 3/20 COB for Iraq Contingency 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (S/NF)  ORCA said there was no change to current threat 
information, but continued to recommend caution and indicated 
that a "lone wolf" attack scenario remains the most likely 
(ref a).  SOC said the Central Security Organization had no 
indications of planned demonstrations.  DAO reported that 
airport officials confirmed normal operations with no plans 
to close or curtail in the event of war in Iraq.  EAC members 
discussed airlines continuing to operate.  Pol/E reported 
that Emirates Airlines and Yemenia Airlines planned to 
continue operations. 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  EAC members discussed the current Centcom 
guidance on force protection condition.  After a discussion 
of likely scenarios and opsec considerations, EAC agreed to 
move to a StandFast posture effective at close of business on 
March 20. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  EAC decided to alert American employees about the 
StandFast decision immediately, while waiting until after the 
March 20 EAC meeting to alert FSNs via a DCM-hosted meeting. 
A declaration of StandFast means the immediate closure of the 
Embassy and curtailment of all but essential operations. 
American employees must remain at their assigned StandFast 
location (Embassy, residence or Alternate Command Center) and 
cannot travel without RSO permission.  FSN access is severely 
limited to a list of essential employees updated daily by 
section heads via the RSO (ref c). 
 
¶6.  (C)  The distribution of gas masks and atropine kits will 
be made March 19 by HU and FMO. 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  Because of the Marib incident of an employee 
being the killer and the issue of an exposed area for vehicle 
bomb checks in front of the Embassy, EAC decided to end 
parking privileges inside the compound for FSNs effective 
with the shift to StandFast.  FSNs will be asked to park 
their cars along the barricaded median outside the Embassy 
wall to help block sightlines while vehicles are checked. 
After StandFast, the issue will be reviewed to decide whether 
to continue the practice or alter it. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Admin made arrangements for supplies, including 
mattresses, sheets and toiletries, to be made available for 
those employees remaining in the Embassy during StandFast. 
The cafeteria will be open for breakfast, lunch, dinner and 
weekends.  In addition, Admin has ensured that motorpool 
handled the change to travel via armored vehicles only during 
MoveSafe with DAO's able assistance. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
No Immediate Request for Authorized Departure 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C)  Ambassador continued to ask EAC members to consider 
seriously whether Post should recommend a change to 
authorized departure status.  Ambassador said that without a 
completed investigation and concrete information on motive 
for the Marib incident, the matter should be discussed again 
at the March 20 EAC.  Section heads queried their staff to 
see if who would plan to leave under authorized departure. 
ADM, Pol/Econ, CONS and DAO indicated that none of their 
staff or spouses would plan on leaving under current 
circumstances. 
 
--------------- 
Warden Messages 
--------------- 
 
¶10.  (U)  CONS reported that, per Department instruction, a 
Warden Message advising Americans to consider buying plane 
tickets in advance as a precautionary measure would be 
disseminated March 19.  CONS will also work with other 
sections to continue close contact with the airlines and 
airport to stay up to date on available flights. 
HULL