This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 SANTO DOMINGO 006486 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA AND DRL 
NSC FOR SHANNON AND MADISON 
USDOL FOR ILAB 
TREASURY FOR OASIA-LAMONICA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/12/2013 
TAGS: DR ELAB PINS PGOV
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: SUCCESSFUL NATIONAL WORK 
STOPPAGE 
 
 
Classified By: Charge Lisa Kubiske for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  A national work stoppage November 11, 
successfully organized by leftist groups and a few unions to 
protest deteriorating economic conditions and the 
government's economic policies, attracted wide participation 
and shut down businesses across the country.  Although most 
cities remained very quiet, scattered confrontations left 
eight persons dead and some 34 injured.  Some of the deaths 
resulted from police gunfire, but the casualties were 
relatively low in comparison with similar protests in the 
past.  President Mejia, senior military officers, and 
political party leaders expressed sympathy with the public's 
frustration, supported their right to peaceful protest, and 
strongly discouraged violence.  Security forces arrested at 
least 544 persons, many of whom were to be charged with 
disturbing the peace but were expected to be released shortly 
in accordance with law.  It is unlikely the organizers will 
win fulfillment of their unrealistic demands.  It is too 
early to know whether the event will influence the 
government's policies or the presidential election campaign 
in any way.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) A national work stoppage, or "general strike," took 
place across the Dominican Republic from 6:00 a.m. local 
November 11 to 6:00 a.m. local November 12.  Led by a 
"Nacional Coordinator for Unity and Struggle" (Coordinadora 
Nacional para la Unidad y Lucha), participating or supporting 
organizations ranged from the Armed Front for Popular 
Struggle (FALPO, whose leader was arrested in Colombia for 
links with terrorists there) to the mainstream National 
Council of Labor Unity (Consejo Nacional de Unidad Sindical - 
CNUS).  However, leaders of other mainstream labor groups, 
including the largest transport workers union, refused to 
support the stoppage. 
 
¶3. (U) The protest was designed to show public frustration 
with rapidly rising living costs and widespread electric 
power outages in recent months.  The organizers called on the 
GODR to raise the minimum wage, double salaries, restrain 
prices, and restore electricity within 30 days.  The leaders 
also called for a debt moratorium and an end to the IMF 
program.  In light of the widespread participation, they 
termed the strike "successful." 
 
¶4. (C) Youths from some poorer neighborhoods burned tires and 
threw trash on roads to slow traffic, but in many cases 
traffic passed without incident.  According to the National 
Police general in charge of investigations, police reacted 
violently only when surrounded or cornered by demonstrators 
who were throwing rocks and bottles or shooting.  Police and 
army troops were deployed mainly in areas that had been prone 
to violence during past protests and by vulnerable public 
facilities such as bridges and banks.  The scattered violent 
incidents, according to the National Police, left eight 
persons dead (including one policeman) and 34 wounded 
(including seven security force personnel).  The armed forces 
chief, in comments to us, attributed five of the deaths to 
police gunfire -- the police gave us a lower figure -- and 
one to FALPO extremists.  He noted that army troops 
performing police duties operated under strict rules of 
engagement.  Three deaths occurred in greater Santo Domingo 
and the rest in interior towns. 
 
¶5. (U) Before and during the stoppage, the President, 
political party leaders, and senior military officers 
expressed sympathy with the public's frustration over serious 
economic problems, acknowledged the right to protest 
peacefully, and strongly encouraged non-violence.  At the 
same time, in an effort to prevent violence, the GODR 
announced deployment of all available police and army troops, 
especially in and around the capital city.  The authorities 
emphasized that they were prepared for any contingency. 
Before and during the strike, security forces searched 
vehicles and their occupants for weapons.  They arrested at 
least 544 persons, many of whom were to be charged with 
disturbing the peace and were expected to be released within 
48 hours in accordance with law.  Several protest organizers, 
arrested prior to the strike, were subsequently released 
without being charged. 
¶6. (C) Late on November 11, authorities noticed that some 
usually troublesome neighborhoods in the capital were quiet, 
apparently because they had electric power.  Consequently, 
the government switched power distribution from affluent 
neighborhoods in the capital to other low-income areas in an 
effort to avert disturbances there.  Note: Electricity supply 
has fallen sharply below demand in recent weeks.  Much of the 
distribution is in government hands following the GODR's 
agreement with Union Fenosa.  End note. 
 
¶7. (U) The day after the strike, legislators disagreed on 
what should be done in response.  Chamber of Deputies 
president Alfredo Pacheco (of the ruling PRD) called on the 
GODR to immediately review its policies in light of the 
strike, while Senate president Jesus Vasquez (PRD) asked the 
public to give the authorities time to make necessary 
changes.  Secretary of Interior and Police Pedro Franco Badia 
said the government is disposed to have a dialog with the 
groups that organized the work stoppage, but noted that it 
would be impossible to double salaries for Dominican workers. 
 
¶8. (C) Comment:   President Mejia, who has often pointed to 
the "three years of labor peace" since he assumed office, has 
now had to cope with the first nationwide protest of his 
presidency.  His predecessor, Leonel Fernandez (1996-2000), 
faced more such disruptions.  Mejia gets kudos for upholding 
the human right of free speech and peaceable protests.  We 
are still looking into the situation on the arrests.  By 
historical standards, the violence this time was relatively 
limited and there have been few accusations that authorities 
used excessive force.  While there was plenty of cause for 
discontent (something Mejia himself noted) and plenty of 
sympathy throughout the country for a peaceful protest, the 
success of the work stoppage also reflects good planning on 
the part of the organizers.  They planned, and got, an event 
that called for support by essentially adding a fourth day to 
a long weekend without any requirement to march in the 
streets.   Government fulfillment of their demands within 30 
days, on the other hand, seems highly unlikely, both for the 
content (stabilizing the economy while raising all wages) and 
the timing (too close to Christmas).   It is too early to 
know whether the event will influence the government,s 
policies or the presidential election campaign in any way. 
End comment. 
KUBISKE