This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003139 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION JULY 14: APPOINTMENT OF 
SHEIKH SABAH AL-AHMAD AS NEW PRIME MINISTER 
 
 
Summary: All media focus on decision of Amir of Kuwait to 
divest the office of prime minister from the portfolio of 
Kuwait's ailing Crown Prince and transfer it to Minister of 
Foreign Affairs (and de facto head of government) Sheikh 
Sabah al-Ahmad.  Editorials, though preachy and full of 
didactic advice for the new PM, are unusually supportive of 
the appointment, which most writers hope will signal an era 
of good feelings in Kuwaiti governance. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶1.   News Stories: All newspapers lead with news of the 
appointment of former Acting Prime Minister Sheikh Sabah Al- 
Ahmad as the new Prime Minister of Kuwait. All newspapers 
report that Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad sent a letter to the Crown 
Prince and former Prime Minister, Sheikh Saad, "commending 
his sincere efforts in holding the responsibility of 
chairing successive governments." 
 
Al-Qabas reports that an official source has denied reports 
that the Crown Prince, Sheikh Saad, was stripped of his 
powers as head of the government, stressing that Sheikh Saad 
had voluntarily submitted his resignation as required by the 
constitution, which calls for the resignation of the 
government immediately following parliamentary elections. 
 
Al-Rai Al-Aam reports that MPs, academicians and political 
figures welcome the appointment of Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad to 
form the new government, and commend the separation of the 
positions of Crown Prince and Prime Minister. Al-Anba 
newspaper reported that Shia'a scholars in Kuwait have also 
welcomed Sheikh Sabah's appointment. 
 
Al-Qabas reports that Islamist Salafi Islamic Coalition 
chairman Khalid Sultan Al-Issa stated that the separation of 
the positions reflects the "beginning of a new era," and 
that the composition of the new cabinet will determine the 
level of cooperation between the government and the National 
Assembly. 
 
All newspapers report a statement by the Secretary General 
of the Islamic Constitutional Movement, Issa Al-Shaheen that 
the decision is a big step towards political reform in 
Kuwait. 
 
Al-Seeyasah reports that former MP Adnan Abdelsamad stated 
that the National Assembly is now capable of holding the 
Prime Minister accountable for his mistakes, in contrast to 
when the Crown Prince held the position. 
 
All newspapers report that Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad is expected 
to announce the new Council of Ministers (cabinet) on July 
¶15. 
 
Al-Watan reports on its front page that Islamist MP Waleed 
Al-Tabtabaei warns against the appointment of "Westernized" 
ministers in the new government. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3.  "The New Government and Kuwait's Dues" 
Editor-in-chief of independent Al-Qabas, Waleed Al-Nesef, 
opined (7/14): "Kuwait stands at a historic moment that 
requires the political leadership to guide the country 
towards the future. [The new Prime Minister] has to appoint 
cabinet members who respect and defend laws, and are capable 
of resisting the extortion of MPs. Kuwait deserves a 
government that believes in the principles of participation. 
therefore, the number of royal family members in the new 
cabinet should be limited. Kuwait deserves a government that 
is politically balanced, not controlled or led by one 
current or power. We want a courageous government that is 
capable of making incisive decisions and is able to 
implement these decisions. This is a new opportunity for 
Kuwait to seriously solve its problems and confront the 
internal and the regional problems facing the country." 
 
¶4.  "May God Help you" 
Editor-in-chief of independent Al-Watan, Mohammad Al-Jassim 
writes (7/14): "We have to look toward the future now after 
the appointment of Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad as the Prime 
Minister. Our efforts must be united to reorganize our 
internal affairs. The duties thrown on Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad 
are enormous. One of the most important issues that the 
government must deal with is the reformation of the 
relationship between the government and the National 
Assembly, which was troubled over the past years. Kuwait 
also needs to reconstruct its political and economical 
systems in light of regional and international events. We 
extend our congratulations to Sheikh Sabah and at the same 
time we tell him, `May God help you.'" 
 
¶5.  "The Reign" 
Editor-in-chief of independent Al-Rai Al-Aam, Jassim Boodai 
writes (7/14): "Sheikh Saad has been serving Kuwait without 
rest since the Sixties. He engaged in constructive dialogue 
in making his decisions. He stood beside the Amir on many 
occasions, and helped him in running the country and 
rebuilding Kuwait after the invasion. He ignored his 
doctor's advice to relax and ended up paying a dear price 
for his continued efforts. The assignment of Sheikh Sabah Al- 
Ahmad as Prime Minister is. an honor to Sheikh Saad by 
reducing the load of his duties." 
 
¶7.  "More Important than the Appointment" 
Ahmad Al-Dayeen wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam (7/14): 
"I strongly believe that Kuwait is facing a serious 
political challenge and its direction depends on what the 
new Prime Minister aims to achieve. and the team who will 
assist him in his mission. Moreover, from the names I have 
read so far as possible Cabinet members, it appears that the 
next Cabinet will not be in touch with the requirements of 
the twentieth century. I believe that the government will 
include members of the religious parties, while liberals and 
businessmen will be excluded. This is a preliminary 
indication that Kuwait has not comprehended what it needs to 
face the future, or the changes in the region planned by the 
US." 
 
¶8.  "One Step in a One Thousand Mile Trip" 
Liberal lawyer Hassan Al-Essa wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(7/14):  "The appointment of Sheikh Sabah as Prime Minister 
is an important step in a one thousand mile trip. Sheikh 
Sabah has before him the difficult task of implementing 
reforms, and is not an exaggeration to say that the new 
National Assembly will be an obstacle in the road reform of 
many issues. These are just small challenges compared to 
what is happening in the region." 
 
¶9.  "We Welcome, Cautiously" 
Abdelataif Al-Duaij wrote in independent Al-Qabas (7/14): 
"I have mentioned on many occasions that we do not want a 
change in persons only [in the cabinet], but rather new and 
open policies. We need to be politically, socially and 
economically open to others. Our welcoming of Sheikh Sabah 
as Prime Minister depends on whether if he is capable of 
starting a new era or not." 
 
 
JONES