This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 SANAA 002476 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/09/2013 
TAGS: PREL PTER AMGT EAID PARM MCAP SA YM IZ ICC COUNTER TERRORISM DEMOCRATIC REFORM ECON COM
SUBJECT: NEA A/S BURNS' 10/4/03 MEETING WITH FM QIRBI: CT 
COOPERATION; ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE; HOA; ARTICLE 98; DIP 
POUCH/FLIGHTS 
 
REF: A. SANAA 2440 
 
     ¶B. SANAA 2410 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edmund J. Hull for reasons 1.5 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: During a 10/4/03 call on FM Qirbi, NEA A/S 
Burns reviewed U.S.-Yemeni CT cooperation and focused on U.S. 
development assistance.  Burns stressed the need for Yemen to 
pursue domestic reforms as the U.S. works to increase 
assistance, e.g. via MEPI and, if Yemen qualifies, the MCA. 
Qirbi agreed on the need for reforms, particularly judiciary. 
 They reviewed Yemeni cooperation with the Gulf states and 
interaction with the Horn of Africa.  A/S Burns stressed the 
need for an Article 98 agreement.  Qirbi said ROYG 
ratification of the Rome Statute was not imminent, and 
undertook to work the Article 98 issue within the Cabinet. 
Burns also underscored the need for Yemeni cooperation to 
ensure success of Embassy Sanaa's 10/5 diplomatic support 
flight, and Qirbi was supportive.  On Iraq, Burns thanked 
Qirbi for Yemen's support of AL recognition of the Iraqi 
Governing Council (IGC), and they agreed on the need for 
security and steps to place maximum authority in Iraqi hands. 
 Qirbi said the Palestine situation is still "worrisome" and 
expressed concerns that U.S. presidential elections next year 
would weaken efforts to implement the roadmap.  Septels 
report A/S Burns' meetings with President Saleh, other Yemeni 
officials and NGOs.  End summary. 
 
YEMEN COMMITTED TO COUNTER-TERRORISM COOPERATION 
 
¶2. (C) NEA A/S Burns, accompanied by Ambassador, DCM and 
Pol/Econ Chief (notetaker) called on FM Abubaker al-Qirbi on 
10/4/03 at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  Qirbi also 
hosted a lunch iho A/S Burns later in the day. 
 
¶3. (C) A/S Burns and Ambassador praised the ROYG's recent 
success in apprehending a terrorist cell (ref a), but 
stressed the need for Yemen to stay ahead of al-Qaida to 
prevent it from reorganizing.  Ambassador noted that the both 
the A/S and GEN Abizaid met Central Security Force (CSF) 
Chief of Staff COL Yahya Saleh and had paid informative 
visits to the CSF range.  Qirbi said that Yemen has 
demonstrated a commitment to transparency and is no longer 
trying to hide terrorist operations.  He admitted there is 
room for more progress on CT and mentioned the need for 
training and logistical support, saying the ROYG is working 
to track and arrest terrorists to eliminate Yemen as a 
breeding ground for terrorism. 
 
¶4. (C) On developing the Coast Guard, both A/S Burns and AMB 
Hull emphasized the need not just for equipment, but for 
training and developing the infrastructure to support 
cost-efficient Coast Guard, Navy and commercial operations. 
 
IMPROVED COOPERATION WITH SAUDI ARABIA; YEMEN SEEKS SUPPORT 
FOR INCREASED ROLE IN GCC 
 
¶5. (C) FM Qirbi said that Yemen and Saudi Arabia are starting 
to see more "eye-to-eye" on the issue, resulting in 
increasing cooperation and transparency after "shying away" 
from issues of terrorism for the past several years.  He 
expressed hope that Yemen will be able to expand CT 
cooperation to other Gulf states.  Referring to the 
Secretary's annual meeting with GCC Foreign Ministers during 
 
SIPDIS 
the UNGA, Qirbi asked that Yemen be included in such regional 
contacts when the subject is counter-terrorism. 
 
¶6. (C) Qirbi said that Qatar and Oman, and UAE to a lesser 
degree, support a greater role for Yemen within the GCC. 
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia are less certain.  Qirbi said his 
goal for the next Gulf states summit in 12/03 is to push for 
more economic development and freer markets, as well as 
expanded acceptance of Yemeni workers in the Gulf states. 
Yemeni labor is not a threat to security, he said. 
 
DEVELOPING HOA RELATIONSHIPS TO PROMOTE REGIONAL STABILITY 
 
¶7. (C) A/S Burns suggested that Yemen could assist the USG in 
developing regional policy toward the Horn of Africa 
countries to track with security cooperation already underway 
with that region.  Qirbi welcomed the idea, noting that Yemen 
is affected by events in the Horn, and reviewed current 
issues in the area.  Refugees, mainly from Somalia and 
Eritrea, affect economic conditions, political stability, and 
social and health factors in Yemen.  Qirbi expressed concern, 
in particular, that the continuing lack of a government 
Somalia could turn it into the next Afghanistan as a 
terrorist haven. 
 
¶8. (C) The FM identified Yemen's objectives in the region as 
security -- especially enhanced CT cooperation -- and 
economic/political cooperation.  He observed that close 
relations among Yemen, Sudan and Ethiopia did not define an 
"exclusive club," noting that Ethiopia was wooing Kenya and 
he would invite Djibouti to closer coordination during a 
pending visit. 
 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: FOCUS ON JUDICIAL REFORM AND REDUCING 
CORRUPTION 
 
¶9. (C) Qirbi characterized development in Yemen's more remote 
areas as "minuscule," and said Yemen is looking to MCA to 
help it fund projects.  He acknowledged that the ROYG must 
tackle some issues in order to qualify, specifying judicial 
reform, corruption and economic reform as areas "acceptable" 
to the government and president Saleh for focus.  A/S Burns 
agreed on the need for reform.  He stressed that progress 
would enable the USG to do more on economic assistance. 
 
¶10. (C) A/S Burns pointed out that Yemen has been the biggest 
beneficiary of MEPI in the region and said the program could 
expand in future.  He acknowledged Yemen's progress on 
democracy and the electoral process, but said there is still 
a need to close holes in the process.  FM Qirbi agreed. 
Burns added that MEPI can be used as a bridge to MCA, and 
that Yemen should set its sights on qualifying in 2005 -- an 
ambitious but achievable goal. 
 
¶11. (C) Qirbi agreed that qualifying for MCA is critical and 
cited the need to encourage more private investment in Yemen. 
 He said previous attempts to stimulate investment had been 
"futile," and that Yemen needs the expertise of the U.S. and 
Europe to improve. 
 
ARTICLE 98 
 
¶12. (C) A/S Burns emphasized the need for Yemen to reach an 
Article 98 agreement soon.  He told Qirbi that 70 countries 
have already entered into such agreements, including Egypt, 
Kuwait and Morocco, and that those agreements offered several 
possible models for a U.S.-Yemeni agreement.  He reminded 
Qirbi that ratification of the Rome Statute before completing 
an Article 98 agreement would result in cessation of U.S. 
assistance.  Qirbi said that the Statute had been returned by 
the Parliament to the government, so ratification would be 
delayed.  Recalling his meeting with PM Senior Adviser Bodine 
during his recent U.S. visit, the FM said he had discussed 
two possible options and Bodine had promised to send him a 
third option for consideration as well.  A/S Burns welcomed 
Qirbi's active engagement on the Article 98 issue and urged 
conclusion of an agreement by year's end.  Qirbi promised to 
consult internally with an eye to concluding and agreement 
enshrined in an exchange of letters. 
 
DIPLOMATIC POUCH/SUPPORT FLIGHTS 
 
¶13. (C) Turning to Embassy Sanaa's scheduled diplomatic 
support flight the following day (10/5), Ambassador stressed 
the need to avoid a repetition of the failed 8/31 flight, 
which cost the USG $70,000.00.  A/S Burns underscored the 
point, noting that expanding U.S. assistance programs 
required reliable pouch and support flight services for the 
Embassy.  FM Qirbi agreed, noting that arrangements had been 
coordinated with the Embassy and the MFA would have a 
representative at the airport to smooth any difficulties. 
(Note:  The diplomatic support flight was off-loaded without 
impediment or delay.  End note.) 
 
IRAQ: SECURITY AND SOVEREIGNTY 
 
¶14. (C) Qirbi referred to the pending UNSCR on Iraq, agreeing 
with A/S Burns that security was the immediate priority in 
Iraq.  He observed that Yemen and the USG have the same 
objectives, including transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqi 
people and the writing of a new Iraqi constitution, and urged 
the U.S. to be "flexible" in working toward those aims. 
Burns expressed thanks for Qirbi's support of Arab League 
acceptance of the IGC at its September ministerial in Cairo. 
 
 
ISRAEL-PALESTINE: PRESSURE TO MAKE BOTH SIDES MEET OBLIGATIONS 
 
¶15. (C) Qirbi said that the situation in Palestine is still 
"worrisome," and that he is concerned that the focus will 
shift away from the Israel-Palestine conflict in the run-up 
to the 2004 U.S. presidential elections.  He praised 
President Bush as the first U.S. president to acknowledge 
Palestinian's right to a state, and emphasized the need to 
implement the roadmap.  He said that the U.S. and Yemen need 
to work together to make Palestine and Israel come around, 
noting that Palestine can be "easily pressured" but Israel 
will listen only to the U.S.  Burns responded that the new PA 
government will need to make tough choices to stop the 
violence and Israel must adhere to its commitments. 
 
¶16. (U) This cable was cleared by NEA A/S Burns. 
HULL