This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANTO DOMINGO 007343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA, WHA/CAR, WHA/PA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV DR
SUBJECT: DOMINICAN PRESS PRAISE FOR AMBASSADOR HERTELL 
 
¶1.  Dominican newspapers have reacted favorably to the 
Ambassador's recent actions staking out the U.S. position on 
free and fair presidential elections.  They recently carried 
a number of accounts stressing U.S. impartiality in Dominican 
politics, based on comments from leaders of opposition 
political parties whom the Ambassador hosted on December 3 
and 4 for luncheon discussions of their views (septels 
follow). Reporters and broadcasters have promptly and 
prominently featured this message, which the Ambassador has 
delivered impromptu to them during encounters in recent 
months. 
 
¶2.  On December 10, Santo Domingo's leading newspaper "El 
Caribe" carried an editorial cartoon featuring its stock 
comic commentator on current events, a heavy-set grumpy 
mustachioed man similar to the figure in the "Pink Panther" 
animated cartoons.  He is dressed as a housewife with broom 
and bucket, vacuum cleaner nearby, speaking into a telephone: 
"Of course, of course, Ambassador Hertell, we are getting 
ready to have clean elections!"  (Chief Editor Victor Manuel 
Tejada sent the original to the Ambassador, with his 
compliments.) 
 
¶3.  The same day, the wide-circulation populist paper "Hoy" 
carried the following op-ed piece signed by commentator 
Victor Gulias: 
 
(begin informal translation) 
 
THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR 
 
The Ambassador of the United States in this country is doing 
the right thing when, according to press reports, he sets 
forth the position of his government vis-a-vis the upcoming 
presidential elections: that the Bush administration pledges 
to limit itself to supporting a transparent process which 
permits Dominicans freely to choose the governing official of 
their preference. 
 
And the stance of the Ambassador is positive, especially 
facing the rumors which suggest a supposed partiality of the 
White House in favor of certain presidential hopefuls, which, 
if it were true, would constitute not only an interference in 
our affairs, but also a serious political error. 
 
The United States knows better than many the situation of our 
country and it is no secret for anyone that its embassy in 
Santo Domingo carries out occasional polls to check the pulse 
and the feeling of the public about its governing officials 
and about Dominican presidential candidates. (sic) 
 
Over the time that he has headed the U.S. diplomatic mission 
in our country, this gentleman born in the nearby sister 
Island of Enchantment, Puerto Rico, has conducted himself 
with dignity, prudence, impartiality and stature, as it 
should be and as is appropriate for a person of his high 
functions.  This conduct is recognized by everyone. 
 
The Ambassador's meetings with Dominican political leaders 
demonstrate simultaneously his impartiality, given that 
according to press reports he has invited to his diplomatic 
seat the representatives of both PRSC factions as well as the 
PLD leaders, at the time that he has been arranging a meeting 
with the contending parties of the ruling PRD.  All of that, 
we believe, contributes to the governability of the country, 
since nobody is unaware of the power of the Americans, in the 
country and in the world. 
 
Ambassador Hertell, assisted by his affable character, his 
disciplined personal style and his talent for dealing with 
people, is well liked in the country and does his work 
without affectation, with discretion and intelligence, which 
helps to improve the very close relations which tie us to the 
United States of America.  These qualities are evident to 
all, along with his certainty that his government will watch 
over the transparency of the elections this coming year. 
 
That transparency, as the United States well knows, is vital 
for preserving calm and social peace in the country.  May 
free and clean elections be organized, may the winner be he 
who gets the most votes, may popular will be respected and 
may the president and vice-president  proclaimed without 
delay -- all these are historical imperatives, since it does 
not benefit the Americans, or the Dominicans, or the 
Caribbean or Latin America for there to be a new hot spot of 
conflict, conflict and riots in Santo Domingo. 
 
Hail, then, to the correct position of the friendly 
Government of the Untied States, as expressed by its 
distinguished and affable ambassador, Mr. Hans Hertell, whom 
we congratulate for such a clear and transparent stand. 
 
(end text) 
HERTELL