This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 003311 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/05/2013 
TAGS: PREL IS KPAL JO MEPP
SUBJECT: JORDANIANS PROUD, SKEPTICAL OF AQABA SUMMIT 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm.  Reasons 1.5 (b,d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) Initial reaction from a sample of Embassy contacts and 
the local press indicates that most Jordanians feel a 
combination of pride for Jordan's role as host of the Aqaba 
Summit (and King Abdullah's performance as Hussein-like 
peacemaker), but lingering skepticism that any real progress 
will result in the weeks ahead.  Many welcomed the 
President's personal intervention but remain unconvinced that 
the U.S. can be an honest broker in the conflict.  There is 
also deep cynicism about Sharon's intentions and Israel's 
true "desire for peace."  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
Nice to Be in the Spotlight 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) Most contacts and local press, before launching into a 
more jaundiced appraisal of the outcome of the Aqaba Summit, 
assessed that the King played his host's role well and had 
done a good job showcasing Jordan to the outside world.  In a 
June 5 editorial, the government-affiliated Jordan Times said 
the summit showed the Kingdom "can punch well above its 
weight," drew parallels to King Hussein's participation at 
the Wye Plantation talks, and said the King had provided a 
"gift of pragmatism, clarity, lucidity and balanced 
objectivity."  The King drew similar praise from Woman's 
Rights activist Nadia Bushnaq (who commented that his speech 
"was the best of the bunch") and from a local business 
contact who told PolCouns that the picture of the four 
leaders assembled in front of Aqaba's mountains and sea was a 
terrific advertisement for the Kingdom. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Good that the President Came, 
But Can U.S. Really Be an Honest Broker? 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) That said, many were quick to caution that while the 
words spoken sounded nice, the true test would be what takes 
place on the ground.  The Director of Crown Prince Hamzeh's 
office commented "I am personally encouraged, and I hope this 
isn't only a photo opportunity.  We have to wait and see and 
to believe because the alternative is too dark."  Regarding 
the President, he went on to say "simply put, we will not get 
anyone higher than Bush and we will not get any other Abu 
Mazen -- there is no alternative but to support this." 
Fardous Askar, a writer who is running for Parliament in the 
June 17 elections, told POLFSN that many he has spoken with 
"are encouraged because for the first time the U.S. was 
truthful about wanting to make a change."  The 
English-language weekly "The Star" noted that "President Bush 
appeared serious . . . and after all is said and done, 
America's part in bringing the two sides together is 
invaluable -- without its patronage and commitment to a just 
and lasting settlement, Israel will simply not deliver on its 
promises." 
 
¶4. (C) A local political analyst, however, had a more 
downbeat assessment of U.S. motives: "The whole thing was a 
production for Bush's campaign.  I don't believe anything 
will change."  He added that "It looked like the whole summit 
was about the Palestinians' need to stop terror and violence. 
 I don't think anything was asked of Sharon." 
 
--------------------------------- 
Deep Distrust of Sharon Unchanged 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) One sentiment that was nearly universal among contacts 
was that Prime Minister Sharon did little to change 
Jordanians' deeply negative opinion of him.  Human Rights 
activist Fawzi Samhoury judged Sharon's speech "a joke, 
because all settlements should be dismantled, and not just 
some outposts."  A Jordanian diplomat echoed this feeling: 
"It was a bit disturbing that Sharon never made a comment 
about a free Palestinian state . . . (his) remarks about 
uprooting outposts are disappointing because all settlements 
are illegal and should be uprooted and not just outposts that 
Israel deems illegal."  Oraib Rintawi, writing in the 
Arabic-language daily "Ad-Dustour," likened the current 
effort to a "peace train" which the President forced Sharon 
to board.  However, he cautioned, Sharon can still jump off 
this train later.  Similarly, Jihad al-Momani in a column 
published in the government-affiliated Arabic Daily "Ar-Rai" 
evinced skepticism that the Aqaba Summit will be any 
different from pervious efforts.  Israel won't change, 
settlements will remain and Palestinians will continue to be 
pushed off their land, he wrote.  Before long, Washington 
will again accuse the Palestinians of missing an opportunity 
for peace.  Finally, another contact noted "Sharon's idea of 
negotiating in good faith is by invading Jenin yesterday, and 
shooting 11 Palestinians in Nablus." 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (C) After the violence of the past 32 months and a string 
of unsuccessful attempts to revive the MEPP, most Jordanians 
are, as one of our FSNs said, "afraid to be hopeful."  Scenes 
of handshakes and smiles and well-crafted speeches, as 
important as they are, will not change this basic outlook by 
themselves.  Only when Jordanians see on-the-ground 
improvements in the lives of Palestinians will they believe 
that a new chapter in the peace process really has begun. 
GNEHM