This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002254 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/07/2013 
TAGS: PREL PBTS PHSA GR TU
SUBJECT: TURKS: RESOLUTION ON AEGEAN CLAIMS "NOT PRODUCTIVE" 
 
 
(U) Classified by Pol-Mil Counselor Stuart Brown.  Reasons 
1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  MFA's DDG for Maritime and Aviation 
Affairs, Vakur Gokdenizler, convoked pol-mil counselor to 
tell us that Congress' adoption of House Concurrent 
Resolution 87 on Aegean claims would be a "symbol of 
deteriorating U.S.-Turkish relations."  He asked that the USG 
do what it could to avoid that, and foresaw that the 
resolution could further strain Turkey's relationship with 
the EU and Greece.  Post undertook to make Turkey's 
displeasure with the resolution known to the Department. 
Text of the MFA's nonpaper on the subject is at para 5.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) On April 7, MFA DDG for Maritime and Aviation Affairs 
Vakur Gokdenizler convoked pol-mil counselor to express 
concern regarding House Concurrent Resolution 87.  The 
resolution concerns Aegean claims, mainly regarding the 
Imia/Kardak islets.  Congressman Robert Andrews (D-NJ) is the 
sponsor, with Congressmen James McGovern (D-MA) and Michael 
Bilirakis (R-FL) cosponsoring.  Gokdenizler said that the 
resolution, which Con. Andrews submitted to the House 
Committee on International Relations on March 11, was 
identical to one submitted in 2001. 
 
 
¶3.  (C) Mentioning that the GOT saw some "factual errors" in 
the resolution's text, Gokdenizler said that the MFA could 
"always get into the details of Aegean problems."  At this 
time, however, he thought that there was a more important 
"political argument" for the US to avoid taking a stand on 
Aegean issues.  Gokdenizler pointed out that Cyprus and 
Aegean issues are "going through a bottleneck in 2004" as the 
EU, Greece, and Cyprus attempt to link Turkish EU membership 
to solutions in both areas.  Asking that the US not aggravate 
either issue, he noted that resolutions like this seem to 
come at "critical times."  He urged us not to let this 
resolution become a "symbol of deteriorating Turkish-U.S. 
relations."  Gokdenizler said the Turkish Embassy in 
Washington was also working the problem. 
 
 
¶4.  (C) Pol-mil counselor replied that Secretary Powell's 
April 2 visit had gone a long way toward re-strengthening 
bilateral ties, but that much work remained.  He undertook to 
make the GOT's concern regarding the resolution known to the 
Department. 
 
 
¶5.  (U) Following is the text of the nonpaper Gokdenizler 
presented: 
 
 
Begin Text: 
 
 
-- Hon. Robert Andrew (D-NJ), Hon. McGovern (D-MA) and Hon. 
Bilirakis (R-FL) prepared a concurrent resolution on 11 March 
2003, entitled "Expressing the Sense of Congress regarding 
Turkey's claims of sovereignty over islands and islets in the 
Aegean Sea."  The draft resolution was referred to the 
Committee on International relations. 
 
 
-- This is not the first draft of its kind.  The Committee 
received a similar one on 4 April 2001 but it did not take 
any action. 
 
 
-- The content of the draft is unacceptable.  It contains 
one-sided, biased, prejudiced arguments.  It jumps into hasty 
conclusions without any detailed legal basis about the status 
of the Aegean island, islets. 
 
 
-- It also contradicts the declared US position on the Aegean 
issues.  The US has exerted important efforts in the past for 
the settlement of these issues and has displayed a balanced 
and evenhanded approach (madrid agreement, bilateral talks, 
etc.)  The US therefore is well aware of the complex and 
interrelated nature of these issues than any other country. 
 
 
-- Despite these facts, the draft, if accepted, would mean a 
fundamental change in the US position which would have 
negative repercussions on the Turkish-US relations at this 
critical time.  The timing of this renewed attempt therefore 
raises concerns about its real motive as well. 
 
 
-- The draft is also unhelpful and counter productive at a 
time when the Aegean issues are being discussed between 
Turkey and Greece in the form of exploratory contacts. 
 
 
-- Turkey hopes this draft, as in the past, will not be 
supported in the Committee for further action and the US 
Administration will spare no effort to this end. 
 
 
End Text. 
 
 
PEARSON