This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRUSSELS 005593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR SA, EUR/ERA 
PLEASE PASS USAID FOR ANE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/10/2013 
TAGS: PREL EAID PTER AF PK IN CE NP XD EUN USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: A/S ROCCA CONSULTATIONS ON SOUTH ASIA WITH EU 
COMMISSION 
 
Classified By: USEU Poloff Van Reidhead for reasons 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) On December 8 in Brussels, SA A/S Christina Rocca met 
with EU counterparts at the European Commission to discuss 
ongoing developments in South Asia (participants listed para 
11). 
 
--On Afghanistan, interlocutors said at this time they could 
identify only euros 20 million in available Commission and EU 
member state funds to assist the 2004 elections.  The U.S. 
and EU should consider holding a donors' coordination meeting 
on the margins of the ADF early in 2004 
 
--The EU is encouraged by recent steps toward normalizing 
India-Pakistan relations.  Interlocutors agreed the next best 
step would be a Musharraf-Vajpayee meeting, and that it would 
be important to encourage a positive outcome of the SAARC 
meetings. 
 
--The EU denied the existence of a split between U.S. and EU 
positions on Nepal, and promised to correct the problem that 
caused the Commission's Kathmandu delegation to release a 
statement on human rights without consulting the U.S. 
 
--On Sri Lanka, the EU stated that time is running out for 
Colombo to get its house in order so that peace talks can 
resume. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Afghanistan: Ramping Up for Elections 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) A/S Rocca opened the meeting with an assessment of 
continuing international efforts to enhance security and 
accelerate reconstruction and development in Afghanistan. 
She delivered a strong message that the donor community was 
coming up short on its commitment to fund the June 2004 
elections.  Donors need to demonstrate their commitment to 
Afghan democracy, she said, by finding a way to adequately 
fund the 2004 elections.  The U.S. has committed USD 15 
million to the election process, but UNAMA's estimated 
funding requirements for registration and polling would be 
around USD 78 million and USD 40 million, respectively. 
European Commission (EC) interlocutors, led by Deputy 
Director General for External Relations Herve Jouanjean, said 
that the EU put the figures needed for elections at euros 70 
million for registration and euros 20 million for polling. 
In either case, they said, a straw poll of EC and member 
state pledges shows only euros 20 million available for 
elections.  The cost would go up if there were ultimately two 
rounds of elections.  EC staff suggested that one idea might 
be to use funds in the ARTF recurrent budget -- although EC 
Asia Director Fokion Fotiadis urged caution and said that 
such a maneuver should be considered only as a last resort. 
 
¶3. (C) Jouanjean and EC External Relations Cabinet member 
Barbara Brandtner recommended that it might be a good idea to 
hold a donors' coordination meeting on the margins of the ADF 
early in 2004 (note: this was first discussed with the 
Secretary during his November 18 meeting with the EU Troika 
 
SIPDIS 
in Brussels).  Donors could use the opportunity to coordinate 
pre-election support and discuss ways to bring forward 
multi-year reconstruction pledges.  Fotiadis noted that the 
World Bank would be releasing its needs assessment around the 
same time.  We should be careful, he said, to ensure that any 
coordination meeting does not coincide with the report's 
release, because the report is sure to highlight the 
inadequate level of overall international support for Afghan 
reconstruction. 
 
¶4. (C) A/S Rocca described how the USG envisions spending the 
USD 50 million authorized by Congress for FY 2004 
counternarcotics programs in Afghanistan.  Rocca's 
interlocutors said the EU, which has become increasingly 
alarmed at the rapid increase in Afghan poppy production, was 
very grateful for Congress' decision to provide such a sum. 
 
¶5. (C) On PRT deployments, A/S Rocca conveyed U.S. plans for 
fielding new PRTs in the southeast concurrent with Karzai 
taking steps to improve central authority in that region.  At 
the same time, the U.S. will step up its cooperation with 
Pakistan to clamp down on cross-border Taliban incursions in 
the region.  A/S Rocca encouraged the EU and member states to 
continue their support for PRTs.  The EC staffers agreed that 
increasing security and central authority in the southeast 
was a critical next step for Afghanistan.  EU member states 
were continuing to evaluate possible PRT contributions, and 
the EC regularly tells NGOs that they should do a better job 
working with, not against, PRTs.  They noted that the EC 
would be briefing CARE on December 9 to explain the need for 
greater NGO-PRT coordination. 
¶6. (C) The EC reiterated Commissioner Patten's November 18 
statement to the Secretary that the EC prefers presidential 
and parliamentary elections to be held simultaneously, as 
envisioned in the Bonn process.  This would give more 
credibility to the outcome.  A/S Rocca agreed that it was 
preferable to adhere as much as possible to the Bonn 
timetable but that the Constitution might provide some 
breathing space with respect to the parliamentary elections. 
 
------------------------------------ 
India-Pakistan: Encouraging the Thaw 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (C) Jouanjean said that the EU's November 29 summit with 
India had been very productive (joint EU-India communique 
available at http://europa.eu.int/comm/ 
external relations/india/intro/index.htm).  The EU sensed a 
new Indian optimism and confidence in the future.  The EU is 
worried, however, that India is not paying enough attention 
to the economic and developmental inequities that will 
increase between Indian states as India continues its 
developmental ascension.  Reflecting the new confidence, 
Jouanjean said the Indians were more moderate than ever about 
Pakistan.  There was no "Pak-bashing" as in the past, he 
said.  The Indians, including PM Vajpayee, were "softer and 
more open" than before.  (Note: The EU will hold a 
Ministerial with Pakistan the first week of February 2004.) 
 
¶8. (C) A/S Rocca said the U.S. and EU should keep pushing for 
progress on normalizing India-Pakistan relations.  We should 
keep up the pressure and provide positive reinforcement for 
the positive steps being taken.  Jouanjean said the EC 
agreed, and would do what it could to support a 
Vajpayee-Musharraf meeting on the margins of the regional 
summit in Islamabad next month.  A/S Rocca stressed that it 
would be important to get both sides to prepare carefully for 
the SAARC summit and any possible bilateral meeting so that 
the outcome is positive and will lead to continuing thaw 
between the two countries. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Nepal: Singing from the Same Sheet 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (C) A/S Rocca conveyed growing U.S. concern over the 
apparently irreconcilable differences between the King and 
the political parties.  Nepal was at risk of heading the way 
of failed states; in order to prevent that, it would be 
necessary for the U.S., EU, India and other involved parties 
to coordinate very closely on preventing further 
deterioration.  Rocca expressed concern that the EU was 
drifting from the U.S. position on Nepal, and cited the 
recent EU statement on human rights that was released without 
prior U.S. consultations.  It would be extremely dangerous 
for the Maoists and other spoilers to see any daylight 
between U.S. and EU positions.  The EC interlocutors reacted 
with surprise, and denied the emergence of a gap between U.S. 
and EU positions.  Jouanjean apologized for the oversight of 
its delegation in Katmandu, which released the statement. 
The EC was unaware that the delegation had not consulted with 
the U.S. Embassy.  Jouanjean promised to backtrack the error 
with the EC delegation and the German Ambassador, who 
represents the EU Presidency's interests in Kathmandu, to 
ensure it doesn't happen again.  Interlocutors agreed with 
Rocca that it was important that the Maoists not see any 
exploitable daylight between US and EU positions.  Rocca 
agreed that we should consider a suggestion made by Fotiadis 
that engaged parties convene an international conference to 
stress a united message on Nepal. 
 
-------------------------- 
Sri Lanka: No Time to Lose 
-------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) A/S Rocca stressed that the LTTE must not be treated 
as co-equal with the GOSL.  The one is a designated terrorist 
group while the other is a legitimate, if divided, 
government.  Rocca's interlocutors listened politely, but 
avoided a discussion that would force them to defend 
Commissioner Patten's recent visit to the LTTE's northern 
headquarters to meet with LTTE commander Probakharan.  Rocca 
and the EC agreed that for the peace process to be 
successful, the President and PM would need to move fast to 
resolve their stalemate. 
------------ 
Participants 
------------ 
 
¶11. (U) U.S. Participants: 
A/S Christina Rocca 
USEU Development Counselor Patricia Lerner 
USEU Poloff Van Reidhead (notetaker) 
 
EU Participants: 
EC External Relations Deputy Director General Herve Jouanjean 
EC External Relations Cabinet Member Barbara Brandtner 
EC External Relations Asia Director Fokion Fotiades 
EC External Relations Asia Head of Unit Julian Wilson 
EC External Relations Asia Head of Unit Laurence 
Argimon-Pangratis 
 
¶12. (U) Kabul minimize considered. 
 
¶13. (U) A/S Rocca has cleared this message. 
 
Foster