This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000359 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/04/2012 
TAGS: PREL PHUM BM NLD ASSK
SUBJECT: NLD COMMENTS ON PRISONER RELEASES, INTIMIDATION, 
AND MANDALAY RALLY 
 
 
Classified By: DCM RON MCMULLEN FOR REASON 1.5(D). 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary:  On March 18, NLD Central Executive 
Committee members told Embassy officials that the SPDC 
included 3 NLD prisoners in the 45 prisoners released on 
March 16.  However, the NLD also charged that the SPDC 
continues to condone, if not direct, harassment of the NLD 
and Aung San Suu Kyi.  The prisoner releases are the first 
since last November and are probably linked to Special 
Rapporteur Pinheiro's visit this week.  End Summary. 
 
Three NLD Prisoners Released 
 
¶2. (SBU)  On March 16, the SPDC announced the release of 45 
prisoners described as "elder inmates, females, either 
pregnant or with young children, and those incarcerated for 
disturbing peace and tranquility."  The announcement was 
provided to the local press but, as far as we have 
ascertained, not to the diplomatic community.  The SPDC has 
made similar releases of pregnant women and women with 
children over the past year at the request of Special 
Rapporteur for Human Rights Sergio Pinheiro.  With Pinheiro 
arriving in Rangoon on March 19, it may be that the prisoner 
release was motivated by his visit, although the SPDC has not 
made the connection explicit. 
 
¶3. (C)  According to NLD CEC members, there were 3 NLD 
members among those released.  One of the NLD prisoners is 
elderly and another has epilepsy, according to the NLD, so 
the organization was pleased to have them out of prison. 
That said, the CEC members went on to note that these are the 
first NLD prisoners released since last November and that 
there are many other elderly and sick NLD prisoners still in 
prison.  NLD Secretary U Lwin also stated that the identities 
of the 115 prisoners the regime claims to have released in 
November have never been clarified. 
 
Pamphlets Attack ASSK and Authorities Harass NLD Members 
 
¶4. (C)  The NLD CEC members said that the distribution of 
defamatory pamphlets against Aung San Suu Kyi continues at 
many locations throughout the country.  The NLD leaders found 
it implausible that the regime cannot identify those 
distributing the pamphlets when it closely monitors all 
citizens' activities, especially the publishing and 
distribution of written materials. 
 
¶5. (C)  The NLD leaders said that, since February, there has 
also been an increase in repression against NLD members at 
locations throughout the country.  They cited the following 
examples: a) authorities discouraged NLD members from working 
at the NLD office in Kawthaung, the southernmost town in 
Burma; b) an NLD Member of Parliament elect in southern Shan 
State was told by local authorities to resign from a position 
he held at a local monastery; and c) authorities in Bago 
questioned and harassed the landlord of the NLD office there. 
 NLD Chairman U Aung Shwe argued that while local officials 
took these actions against NLD members, they may have been 
done at the direction of central authorities.  U Aung Shwe 
noted in particular that in some of the locations where 
harassment is occurring relations between the NLD and local 
authorities have traditionally been good. 
 
Ex-members and USDA Hold Anti-NLD Rally in Mandalay 
 
¶6. (C)  The NLD CEC members said recent press reports 
regarding an anti-NLD rally in Mandalay on March 9 were true. 
 Two ex-NLD members organized the rally with support from 
Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA) members. 
The rally denouncing the NLD was held in Kanaung Hall, which 
is owned by Minister of Industry-1 Aung Thaung; a former a 
Military Intelligence officer and current USDA official. 
 
¶7. (C)  Comment:  The release of the 45 prisoners, including 
the 3 NLD members, is probably directly linked to Special 
Rapporteur Pinheiro's visit this week.  Pinheiro will almost 
certainly urge the regime to release the political prisoners 
as soon as possible, as he has often done in the past. 
Whether these urgings will have any more impact than they 
have in the recent past remains to be seen, particularly in 
view of the NLD's allegations of increased regime harassment. 
 End Comment. 
Martinez