This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 001918 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EB and EAP/BCLTV 
STATE PASS USTR BRYAN 
STATE ALSO PASS USAID FOR ANE/DEL MCCLUSKY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
USDOC FOR 4431/MAC/AP/OPB/VLC/HPPHO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ETRD ECON VM BTA
SUBJECT: U.S. JOINT VENTURE DISPUTE IN DAK LAK PROVINCE 
 
REF: A) HANOI 1826 
 
     B) 02 HO CHI MINH CITY 1260 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary.  On July 24, Ambassador met with the 
Director of the Dak Lak Provincial Department of Planning 
and Investment (DPI) to discuss a joint venture dispute 
involving an American company, McCullagh International.  Nhu 
admitted that the case could have a "negative impact on 
business investment," but expressed a hope that a buyout 
would resolve matters by end of the third quarter.  However, 
in a separate July 23 meeting, the assertion by the 
province's People's Committee chairman that the venture's 
equipment was "outdated" and "must be thrown away" could 
presage a U.S. investor facing less than equitable 
compensation.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Ambassador raised the issue of fair dealing for U.S. 
investors with provincial GVN officials during recent travel 
to Vietnam's central highlands, specifically citing the 
"McCullagh-Krong Ana" coffee processing joint venture in Dak 
Lak.  DPI Director Do The Nhu recounted the troubled history 
of the joint venture, claiming DPI had refused to approve 
McCullagh's earlier offer to buy out partner Krong Ana, 
because Krong Ana had changed plans, subsequently 
establishing a second processing plant that left two 
processing companies in the same area, competing for the 
same limited supply of beans.  Nhu also contended that 
additional "traffic problems" would exist if McCullagh were 
to operate as an independent concern.  According to Nhu, 
both processing plants would be along rural Route 4 south of 
the provincial capital, Buon Me Thuot. 
 
¶3.  (U) McCullagh had originally sought to buy out Krong Ana 
in 2001.  With Ambassador's personal intervention with 
senior-level GVN officials (ref B), McCullagh received 
approval from Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) for 
the buyout.  Dak Lak authorities, however, refused to 
implement MPI's decision.  Nonetheless, during the 
Ambassador's call on Nhu, Nhu additionally contended that 
DPI would have approved the McCullagh buyout if McCullagh 
had been willing to relocate to a new area.  He added that 
this solution was now viewed as "too complicated."  (Note: 
It is unclear if this reference was the opinion of one or 
both of the parties and/or of DPI. End Note.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Nhu assessed that, given that Krong Ana had 
established independent operations, that DPI had refused to 
approve McCullagh's buyout of Krong Ana's 40% share, and 
that McCullagh was ready to leave Vietnam, the only probable 
way forward would be for Krong Ana to buy out McCullagh's 
60% interest.  Nhu stated that the Provincial Department of 
Finance would complete an audit of the joint venture 
equipment.  When pressed if an independent audit would be 
available, Nhu confirmed that "Yes, if dramatic differences" 
existed between the parties' valuations. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In a July 23 meeting, however, provincial People's 
Committee Chairman Lang stated that the equipment was worth 
"a couple hundred million Vietnamese Dong." (Note: 
equivalent to under approximately USD 14,000.  McCullagh 
asserts that a buy-out based on its earlier proposal would 
value McCullagh's stake at around USD 850,000.  End Note.) 
Lang also stated that the decision to buy out the U.S. 
partner was only made "to be nice" and that the equipment 
could not be used and would have to be "thrown away."  Lang 
further argued that the inferior coffee produced by the such 
equipment would damage the provincial coffee's reputation. 
Ambassador reiterated that the issue of a fair valuation had 
been raised previously with MPI Minister Phuc (ref A) and 
that he had received assurances that an MPI officer would be 
sent to Dak Lak to assist in reaching a fair resolution. 
Ambassador reminded Nhu of Minister Phuc's pledge to see 
this issue addressed. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment:  This case presents elements of bad faith 
on the part of Krong Ana and may implicate collusion by Dak 
Lak's DPI.  If nothing more, the DPI has intervened in 
business affairs in an effort to substitute its judgment for 
market forces by determining where coffee processing plants 
should be located, how many plants the local market can 
bear, and even impliedly assessing the market value of 
processing equipment, all in favor of the local state-owned 
enterprise partner in this joint venture.  The effort to 
educate provincial authorities on market principles and 
obligations under international trade agreements, such as 
the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA) is a battle 
that has scarcely begun.  This McCullagh-Krong Ana joint 
venture illustrates how joint ventures can go amiss in 
Vietnam, while setting a notorious precedent of local-level 
disregard of ministerial-level directives and policy - 
particularly those related to Vietnam's obligations under 
the BTA.  We are discouraged by this latest response from 
the DPI and People's Committee, and plan to write MPI 
Minister Phuc again urging MPI to send a representative to 
Dak Lak soonest. 
BURGHARDT