This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L KUWAIT 001044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR TERRORIST FINANCE TASK FORCE 
STATE FOR EB/ESC 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/23/2013 
TAGS: PTER EFIN PREL PGOV KU
SUBJECT: KUWAITI PARLIAMENT MOVING FORWARD ON 
ANTI-TERRORISM CONVENTIONS 
 
REF: A. KUWAIT 939 
 
     ¶B. SECSTATE 59891 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Richard H. Jones, reasons 1.5 b and d. 
 
¶1. (C) On March 22, the Ambassador joined the French 
ambassador and the ambassadors of Italy, Canada and Russia as 
well as the British and German DCM's to carry out the G8 
demarche on adherence to counter terrorism conventions with 
Mohammed al-Sagr, the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs 
Committee of Kuwait's National Assembly (reftels).  French 
Ambassador Losguardi made the pitch in his capacity as 
representative of the G8 chair. 
 
¶2. (C) Al-Sagr responded that his committee had completed its 
review of the conventions; the National Assembly was about to 
move forward on legislation that would enable Kuwait to 
complete accession to four of the five agreements.  He 
explained that legislation on the Convention on the 
Suppression of Acts against Maritime Navigation had already 
passed a first reading.  Its second reading would be held 
during next week's assembly session (March 31).  The first 
reading of bills on three of the remaining four conventions 
would likely be passed at the same time.  This would leave 
only the 1999 Convention on Suppression of the Financing of 
Terrorism (CSFT) to go. 
 
¶3. (C) When questioned, al-Sagr explained that the CSFT had 
also been on the agenda for a first reading next week, but he 
had asked that it be delayed because he was concerned that 
some deputies were planning to use the debate on the bill as 
an opportunity to embarrass the GOK by criticizing aid to 
Jordan.  He was reluctant to provide additional details, he 
said, because the issue of relations with Jordan (which in 
many Kuwaitis' eyes "sided" with Iraq in 1990) remains highly 
sensitive in Kuwait.  However, he felt that it would be 
better to wait until after the current conflict with Iraq had 
subsided before bringing this particular piece of legislation 
to the floor of the assembly for debate. 
 
¶4. (C) Al-Sagr stressed that he did not see any trouble in 
passing the legislation when the time comes; "maybe only five 
people are against it," he said.  The Ambassador pointed out 
that it might be hard for outsiders to understand why Kuwait 
was moving on the other conventions but not on the CSFT.  He 
noted that two branches of Kuwaiti charities had had their 
assets frozen for suspicion of financing terrorism.  Some 
would interpret inaction on the CSFT as a sign of a lack of 
Kuwaiti resolve on this critical issue.  The French 
Ambassador supported this line of argument.  Al-Sagr took the 
point and agreed to consult with the Deputy Speaker of the 
National Assembly about the possibility of adding the CSFT to 
next week's session and avoiding criticism of Jordan.  He 
warned the ambassadors that he might need to ask for their 
help with a few key members of the National Assembly in this 
regard. 
 
¶5. (C) COMMENT:  The impending progress on legislation on the 
remaining five counter-terrorism conventions is very welcome 
news.  We will continue to coordinate with our G8 colleagues 
to encourage Mohammed al-Sagr and other members of the 
National Assembly to keep working until all the conventions 
have been approved. 
 
JONES