This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 AMMAN 007068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2013 
TAGS: PINR PREL KDEM KWMN PHUM ECON JO
SUBJECT: BIOS FOR JORDAN'S NEW CABINET MEMBERS 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 06767 
     ¶B. AMMAN 06728 
     ¶C. AMMAN 06812 
     ¶D. AMMAN 06907 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm for reasons 1.5 (B,D) 
 
¶1. (C)  Reflecting a trend (and the 11 ministers) carried 
over from the previous Jordanian cabinet, western-educated, 
Muslim, "East Bankers" dominate the newly-appointed, slimmer, 
21-member cabinet of Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez.  We 
count seven Jordanians of Palestinian origin ("West 
Bankers"), one member of the minority Circassian Muslim 
community, and four Christians among the ministers.  Of the 
East Bankers, most ministers hail from the central Jordanian 
governates of Amman and al-Balqa'a (which includes Salt 
city).  At the same time, the cabinet list appears to make 
good on the King's vision of a more progressive, 
reform-minded cabinet committed to political and economic 
development.  Mainly comprised of young, western-educated 
ministers, including an unprecedented three women, the oldest 
cabinet minister is 57; the youngest is 37 years old. 
Two-thirds -- 14 of 21 -- earned degrees from an American or 
European university. 
 
¶2.  (U)  New members of the cabinet are: 
 
¶A.  (C)  Prime Minister and Defense Minister Faisal al-Fayez: 
 
Fayez's strong tribal credentials -- he is the son of the 
late 'Akef al-Fayez, a prominent leader of the Bani Sakhr 
tribe of central Jordan -- should appease East Bankers 
concerned about the implications of the King's reform agenda. 
 His close relationship with the King also should help 
balance his lack of ministerial experience. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in 1952 in Amman, Fayez graduated 
from Amman's private Catholic De La Salle College (high 
school).  He earned a BA in political science from Cardiff 
University in Britain, and an MA in political science from 
Boston University.  During service at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, he was posted in Brussels.  He was appointed Deputy 
Chief of the Royal Court and Chief of Royal Protocol prior to 
being named Minister of the Royal Hashemite Court in March 
¶2003.  In his position as Chief of Royal Protocol and 
Minister of Court, Fayez was well known to American Embassy 
officers.  As Chief of Protocol, Fayez generally played a 
"behind the scenes role," orchestrating the King's meetings 
and the comings and goings of guests to the palace.  Fayez is 
soft spoken and self-effacing, although we have noticed a 
tendency for him to speak up more frequently at meetings with 
the King over the past two years (presumably as the King 
gained confidence in his abilities.)  In hindsight, the 
emphasis on his political role during this time may have been 
preparation for assuming the position of Prime Minister. 
Fayez is an alumnus of the International Visitor Program on 
"Election Campaign" in 1988.  He is married with three 
children. 
 
¶B.  (C)  Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Industry and 
Trade Mohammad al-Halaiqa: 
 
As the head of the cabinet's economic committee, a budget 
hawk, and one of the more seasoned members, Halaiqa will play 
a major role in coordinating cross-cutting economic issues as 
well as being a court of appeal on budget issues. 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in Shioukh near Hebron in 1951, 
Halaiqa obtained a BS in chemistry from the University of 
Jordan in 1976 and a PhD in industrial chemistry from 
University of Leeds in the United Kingdom.  He served as 
director-general (1990-92) and director (1992-93) of the 
Amman Chamber of Industry.  He was appointed as Assistant 
Secretary-General (1993-94) of the Higher Council for Science 
 
SIPDIS 
and Technology and Director-General of the Jordan Export 
Development Corporation (1994-97).  From 1997-2000 he served 
as Secretary-General of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, 
and was named minister in January 2000.  Dr. Halaiqa served 
as Jordan's chief negotiator for accession to the World Trade 
Organization (WTO).  In June 2000, he was named Deputy Prime 
Minister for Economic Affairs, and Minister of National 
Economy in January 2002.  He was appointed Deputy Prime 
Minister for Economic Affairs and Minister of Administrative 
Development in July 2003.  The Embassy and U.S. officials 
have a high opinion of his professionalism, as demonstrated 
during successive rounds of WTO talks and FTA negotiations. 
 
¶C.  (C)  Minister of Foreign Affairs Marwan al-Muasher: 
 
Muasher is among the strongest proponents in the cabinet of 
political reform and increased political participation.  He 
commented to the Ambassador recently that he had been 
instrumental in ensuring that this cabinet change brought 
about political as well as economic development. 
 
Christian, East Banker.  Born in Amman in 1956, Muasher 
completed secondary education at the Terra Sancta school.  He 
has a BS in electrical engineering as well as an MS and PhD 
in computer science from Purdue University.  Muasher has 
served as a lecturer at the University of Dhahran, Saudi 
Arabia and Director of the computer department at the Jordan 
Electricity Company.  He also worked at the Planning Ministry 
and was advisor to former Prime Minister Zaid Bin Shaker.  He 
was director of the Jordan Information Bureau in Washington 
from 1991-1994 and the spokesman for Jordan's delegation 
during peace treaty negotiations with Israel, signed in 1994. 
 Muasher was appointed as Jordan's ambassador to Israel in 
1995, Minister of Information in 1996, and ambassador to 
Washington in 1997.  In 2000, Muasher received the Kawkab 
(planet) Medal of the First Order.  He has served as Minister 
of Foreign Affairs since January 2002.  Muasher participated 
in an multi-regional project as part of the International 
Visitors Program on "New Technologies in American Industry" 
in 1986. 
 
¶D.  (C)  Minister of Political Development and Parliamentary 
Affairs Mohammad Daoudiyeh: 
 
Given his rural, tribal background, many believe Daoudiyeh 
will emerge as the cabinet's main liaison with tribes to 
explain -- and soften the blow of -- the political reform 
program. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in al-Ejfour near Mafraq in 1947, 
Daoudiyeh obtained a diploma in English from Amman College 
and served in the Ministry of Education between 1968 and 
¶1976.  He then became a journalist and a columnist at the 
Arabic daily al-Dustour.  Between 1992-93, he served as chief 
of the information office at the Royal Court's Public 
Relations Department.  He was elected as a member of the 
Lower House of Parliament in 1993, and served as ambassador 
to Morocco.  He is a member of the Jordan Press Foundation 
and the Jordan Writers Foundation. 
 
¶E.  (C)  Minister of Information and Communications 
Technology and Minister of Administrative Development Fawwaz 
Zu'bi: 
 
A leader in developing Jordan's IT potential and reforming 
the telecommunications sector since 2000, Zu'bi has been one 
of the strongest proponents of economic and administrative 
reform in the government.  Zu'bi and his new title as 
Minister of Administrative Development may indicate the 
King's desire to move ahead with e-government and personnel 
and pension reform plans. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in 1956, Zu'bi holds a BS in 
mechanical engineering and economics, an MS in mechanical 
engineering and physics as well as a PhD from Duke 
University.  Zu'bi worked as Vice Chairman and Executive 
Director of Arab Drip Irrigation Systems Manufacturing 
Company from 1984-2000.  He is a member of the Economic 
Consultation Council, a founding member of the Board of the 
Directors of the Young Entrepreneurs Association.  Zu'bi also 
sits on the Board of Directors of the Jordan River Foundation 
and the International Community School.  He has served as 
minister of information and communications technology since 
June 2000.  He is married with two sons. 
 
¶F.  (C)  Minister of Planning and International Cooperation 
Bassem Awadallah: 
 
Awadallah, who has significantly influenced the direction of 
Jordan's economic reform program since 1999, is particularly 
close to the King, and therefore has a strong sense of 
empowerment. 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in 1964, Awadallah obtained a BA 
in International Economics with honors from Georgetown 
University in 1984.  He earned an MA and a PhD in economics, 
both from the London School of Economics.  From 1988-1990, he 
worked as finance manager of the EDGO Group in London. 
Awadallah subsequently served as Finance and Project 
Development Manager for the New Work Co. Ltd. in Amman and 
then economic adviser to Prime Minister Tawarneh.  In 1999, 
Awadallah became Director of the Economic Department of the 
Royal Court.  Awadallah played a key role in Jordan-Israel 
peace negotiations.  He was appointed Minister of Planning in 
October 2001, a position he has held continuously since that 
time.  Awadallah is not married. 
 
¶G.  (C)  Minister of Justice and Minister of State for 
Cabinet Affairs Salah al-Bashir: 
 
His legal background, role in designing many key economic 
reform policies, and experience as Minister of Industry and 
Trade since 2001 should help Bashir face the challenges of 
reforming Jordan's inefficient legal system.  Bashir is the 
legal architect of many of Jordan's key economic reforms, 
especially in commercial and regulatory areas, on which he 
worked closely with USAID-supported projects.  He has a 
reputation for theoretical brilliance, micro-management, and 
poor administration.  He should be well-suited to clean up 
the clogged legal system, a major deterrent cited by foreign 
investors and human rights activists. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in 1966, Bashir obtained a BA in 
Law from the University of Jordan in 1987, a law degree from 
Harvard Law School, and a PhD in Civil Law from McGill 
University in 1996.  Bashir began his career as a research 
assistant at McGill and went on to become an adjunct 
professor of law at the University of Jordan in 1996.  In 
1997, he was appointed managing partner of Abu Ghazaleh Legal 
Services, and served as legal advisor on international 
affairs and director of the firm's legal department, before 
forming his own firm, International Business Law Associates. 
Bashir was appointed to King Abdullah's 20-member Economic 
Consultative Council in 1999.  He served as Minister of Trade 
and Industry under Abul Ragheb from October 2001-July 2003. 
Bashir speaks excellent English. 
 
¶H.  (C)  Minister of Interior Samir Habashneh: 
 
Criticized by some who believe Habashneh's appointment is a 
reward to one of the King's cronies, human rights advocates 
hope that his activist past -- and four years in detention 
for his political activism in the 1970s -- will herald a more 
relaxed approach to political activism in Jordan. 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in Bethlehem in 1951, Habashneh 
earned his BS in Agricultural Engineering from Baghdad 
University in 1974.  After graduation, he worked in the 
private and public agricultural sectors, and as a journalist 
and columnist in the Arabic daily al-Dustour newspaper.  He 
is a member of the Royal Charter Commission and the Studies 
Center on Freedom, Democracy and Human Rights in the Arab 
World.  He also worked as a consultant at the Ministry of 
Youth in 1993.  He was elected a member of the lower House of 
Parliament in 1993 representing Karak, was appointed Minister 
of Culture in 1995, and was appointed to the Senate in 2001. 
He was named Interior Minister in July 2003.  Habashneh 
participated in a "Parliamentary Exchange" program under the 
International Visitors Program in 1993. 
 
¶I.  (C)  Minister of Education Khalid Touqan: 
 
Touqan's strong academic credentials and experience as 
Education Minister since 2000 should help him forward his 
goal of introducing civic education in Jordan's public 
schools. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Amman in 1954, Touqan obtained 
a BS from the American University of Beirut, an MA from 
Michigan State University, and a PhD from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.  Prior to entering government 
service, he served as head of the Nuclear Engineering 
Department and as Dean of the Department of Engineering and 
Technology at the University of Jordan, as well as President 
of al-Balqa'a Applied Science University.  He has served as 
Minister of Education since his appointment by Abul Ragheb in 
June 2000.   Touqan has worked closely with the Embassy on 
various aspects of education reform.  He is married with two 
sons and a daughter. 
 
¶J.  (U)  Minister of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs Ahmad Hilayel: 
 
The reappointment of Hilayel indicates that the King remains 
confident the Minister adequately supports the King's efforts 
to promote a moderate version of Islam in Jordan. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Na'our in 1948, Hilayel earned 
his BA in Islamic Law (Shari'ah) from the Islamic University 
in Madina, Saudi Arabia in 1972.  He obtained his MA (1976) 
and PhD (1978) from al-Azhar University in Cairo.  He held 
several positions in the Awqaf Ministry until he became its 
Secretary General from 1988-1994.  He has served as Imam of 
 
SIPDIS 
the Royal Court since 1992 and was first appointed Minister 
of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs by former Prime Minister Abul 
Ragheb in June 2001. Hilayel participated in an individual 
International Visitors program on the "Role of Religion" in 
¶1986. 
 
¶K.  (SBU)  Minister of Water and Irrigation and Minister of 
Agriculture Hazem al-Nasser: 
 
Nasser's education and long work experience on water issues 
make him well-suited to address the main challenge of 
promoting reform in a moribund ministry and a sensitive 
sector.  With agriculture consuming the bulk of Jordan's 
water supply, the addition of the Agriculture Ministry to his 
portfolio makes logical sense, but will increase the 
political sensitivity of his position. 
 
Christian, East Banker.  Born in Fuheis in 1963, Nasser 
obtained a BS and MS in underground water resources from the 
University of Jordan in 1984 and 1986 respectively, and a PhD 
from the University of Wurzberg, Germany, in 1990.  Nasser 
started his career at the Water Ministry as head of the Disi 
Water Project in 1991.  He was assistant to the Secretary 
General of the Water Ministry until 1999, when he was 
appointed Secretary General of the Water Ministry.  He became 
Minister of Water and Irrigation in June 2001.  Nasser is 
highly respected for his work in the Water Ministry, where he 
has pushed through important reforms and major projects. 
Nasser has worked closely with USAID in its water sector 
programs. 
 
¶L.  (C)  Minister of Finance Dr. Mohammad Abu Hammour: 
 
A master of budget management and a strong supporter of 
economic reforms, Abu Hammour has been instrumental in 
successfully pushing the military pension reform plan, 
balancing the political influence of the military, and 
reducing the budget deficit to a sustainable level.  A 
faithful protege of former Finance Minister Michel Marto, it 
remains to be seen if Abu Hammour has the authority and 
political experience to sustain Marto's reputation for 
enforcing fiscal discipline on a somewhat reluctant body 
politic.  He told the Ambassador that the new government must 
abide by previous commitments to raise petroleum prices, 
raise the sales tax, and implement pension reform. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Salt in 1961, Abu Hammour 
obtained a BS, MS, and PhD in economics from Yarmouk 
University (1984, 1990, 1997, respectively).  He worked at 
the Central Bank of Jordan (1987-98) and the University of 
Jordan, where he was a part-time lecturer and a committee 
member discussing Master's dissertations.  For several years, 
he worked in a number of offices at the Finance Ministry 
before becoming its Secretary-General in late 2000 -- a 
position which he held until his appointment as Minister of 
Industry and Trade in Abul Ragheb's third cabinet in July 
¶2003.  Abu Hammour is very well known to the Embassy as a 
serious financial technocrat.  He is hard working and was 
respected by the IMF as Secretary General. 
 
¶M.  (C)  Minister of Labor Amjad al-Majali: 
 
Clearly a political appointee who is more interested in 
political issues than labor, Majali will have to learn about 
his new portfolio.  Signaling his political proclivities, he 
told the Ambassador that he had participated in the 
"political" working group at the King's weekend ministerial 
retreat in Aqaba, not the "economic" group. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Karak in 1946, Majali obtained 
a BA in political science from Oklahoma State University in 
¶1970.  He served as deputy chief of protocol at the Royal 
Court.  Between 1985-1990, Majali served as ambassador to 
Bahrain, and in 1992-93, he was head of the International 
Organizations Department at the Foreign Ministry.  He served 
simultaneously as Ambassador to Greece and Cyprus from 
1992-1997.  Majali was elected as member of the Lower House 
of Parliament in 1997, representing Karak.  Prior to his 
appointment as Labor Minister, Majali served in the 19th 
Senate (2003).  He speaks excellent English and is acquainted 
with several former U.S. ambassadors. 
 
¶N.  (U)  Minister of Tourism and Antiquities and Minister of 
Environment Alia Hattough-Bouran: 
 
Bouran's solid environmental credentials and experience as 
former Tourism Minister and trade negotiator will serve her 
well as she assumes the helm of this newly combined portfolio. 
 
Muslim, Circassian, East Banker.  Born in Na'our, Dr. Bouran 
obtained her BS and MS in applied environmental studies from 
Moscow State University.  She earned a PhD in ecology and 
environmental sciences in 1983 from the Russian Academy of 
Science.  Dr. Bouran is a natural resources specialist, 
ecologist and conservation strategist, and has authored more 
than 20 publications in the field.  She served as an 
associate professor of ecological sciences and headed the 
environmental unit at the Center for Strategic Studies at the 
University of Jordan.  Dr. Bouran served as Jordan's National 
Coordinator for the World Conservation Union, a leading 
global NGO working on sustainable development.  She also 
headed the environment section of the National Task Force for 
Children, a commission under the supervision of Queen Noor. 
She was senior advisor on environmental affairs at the 
Foreign Ministry before becoming Secretary General at the 
Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities in June 1998.  Bouran is 
well-known to U.S. officials as the chief Jordanian 
negotiator of the environmental provisions in the U.S.-Jordan 
Free Trade Agreement.  This expertise will serve her well in 
moving forward in implementing those provisions, including by 
holding the bilateral environmental forum called for in an 
FTA annex.  Bouran served in Brussels as Jordan's Ambassador 
to Belgium and the EU since 2001. 
 
¶O.  (SBU)  Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Azmi 
Khreisat: 
 
Through his government and business experience in the energy 
field, Khreisat has earned a reputation for efficiency and 
good decision-making. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in 1956, Khreisat holds an MA in 
electrical engineering from Manchester University in the UK. 
He served as director of the Department of Industrial Power 
at Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources before he became 
secretary general in October 2001.  Khreisat has been 
 
SIPDIS 
director general of the Jordanian Petroleum Refinery since 
April 2003.  Khreisat has been a good contact of the Embassy, 
both as Secretary General and at the refinery company.  He 
has worked closely with the Trade and Development Agency on 
TDA-supported projects.  Khreisat is married with three 
children. 
 
¶P.  (U)  Minister of Social Development Riyad Abu Karaki: 
 
Abu Karaki's military background and strong organizational 
skills will be an asset as he deals with the challenges in 
reforming a Ministry currently in disarray.  He closely 
follows U.S. Army planning techniques and probably will 
utilize oversight and detailed planning in his new position. 
He will quickly find one or two close associates who will 
serve as his trusted agents, overseeing his most important 
projects. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in 1945 in Ma'an, Abu Karaki 
obtained a BA and MA in oriental studies.  A career military 
officer, he served as assistant chief of staff for 
administration and then for operations and training.  Abu 
Karaki is a personable former officer with a long and 
amicable relationship with the U.S. military.  Abu Karaki is 
married with three children. 
 
¶Q.  (C)  Minister of Public Works and Housing and Minister of 
Transport Raed Abu Saud: 
 
Known to the Embassy as an effective professional in his 
former job at the Water Ministry, Abu Saud also is said to 
have close personal connections to Planning Minister 
Awadallah. 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in 1957 in Amman, Abu Saud 
obtained his BA in civil engineering from the University of 
Miami.  From 1982-1999, he managed several investment 
projects in Jordan and abroad.  He headed the administration 
and planning unit at the Ministry of Water from 2000-2003, 
and directly supervised the rehabilitation of Amman's water 
networks.  Abu Saud studied English at the Embassy's American 
Language Center to improve his confidence and English public 
speaking ability. 
 
¶R.  (U)  Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research 
Issam Zabalawi: 
 
Although not known to the Embassy, Zabalawi's strong 
scientific and academic background appears to make him a good 
choice for this combined portfolio. 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in Amman in 1950, Zabalawi 
received BS with distinction in electrical engineering in 
1974 from Cairo University, an MS with distinction in 
microwave communication engineering from Leeds University in 
1976, and a PhD in electrical and electronics engineering 
also from Leeds University in 1979.  Between 1989-1993, he 
served as Dean of the Faculty of Engineering and Technology 
at the University of Jordan, and Chancellor of the University 
of Sharjah from 1999-2003. 
 
¶S.  (U)  Minister of Municipality Affairs Amal Farhan: 
 
Farhan's appointment to head a traditionally male-dominated 
Ministry suggests the King intends to shake up the male- and 
tribal-dominated status quo in cities and towns. 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Nuaimeh/Irbid in 1948, Farhan 
obtained a BA from the American University of Beirut in 
political science in 1970.  She completed an MA and a PhD in 
public administration in 1979 at New York University.  She 
headed the faculty of business administration at the 
University of Jordan from 1979 until 2003, and served as a 
member of the board of trustees of the Queen Alia Fund. 
 
¶T.  (C)  Minister of State and Government Spokesperson Asma 
Khader: 
 
According to PM Fayez, the appointment of well-known human 
rights activist with legal training signals the King's goal 
of invigorating the role of NGOs and civil society in Jordan. 
 Khader has been an outspoken advocate of women's and human 
rights in Jordan, but has sometimes run afoul of activists in 
other human rights organizations with her brusque style. 
 
Christian, West Banker.  Khader is the general coordinator of 
the Sisterhood is Global Institute (SIGI), a non-profit human 
rights organization, and a member of the human rights 
organization Mizan.  She served as former president of the 
Jordanian Women's Union and member of the Arab Lawyers' 
Union.  She also is the founder of the National Network for 
Poverty Alleviation.  She won the UNDP Poverty Eradication 
Award for 2003.  Khader has provided much of the inspiration 
for SIGI and Mizan, and these two organizations will likely 
suffer without her at the helm. 
 
¶U.  (U)  Minister of Health Said Darwazeh: 
 
Darwazeh's business background should help him address some 
of the difficulties faced by international drug companies 
when registering and protecting their products in Jordan, as 
well as to reform the over-staffed and inefficient public 
healthcare system.  We expect Darwazeh to focus on developing 
Jordan's potential as a regional center for advanced medical 
care. 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in Kuwait in 1957, he obtained his 
BS in industrial engineering in the U.S. and a masters in 
business administration from INSEAD, the elite international 
business program in France.  His background as a 
businessperson rather than a physician or an academic makes 
him a unique choice for Jordan's Health Ministry.  He has 
been president of the family-owned Hikma Pharmaceuticals 
Company since 1995.  Hikma is probably the most successful 
Jordanian pharmaceutical company to prosper under Jordan's 
new intellectual property regime.  It has obtained FDA and EU 
approval for exports to the United States and to Europe and 
invested in a New Jersey-based subsidiary. 
 
Please visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov/p/nea/amman/ or access the site through 
the Department of State's SIPRNET home page. 
GNEHM