This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 004577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/24/2013 
TAGS: PINR PGOV PHUM JO
SUBJECT: BIOS FOR NEW JORDANIAN CABINET MINISTERS 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 4533 
     ¶B. AMMAN 4491 
 
Classified By: PolCouns Doug Silliman, per Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (U)  The official Jordanian news agency, Petra, announced 
21 July the release of a royal decree approving the new 
government of Prime Minister Ali Abul Ragheb.  Five ministers 
from the old cabinet have been removed, and eight new figures 
have been brought in.  Of the newcomers, former jailed 
lawmaker Samir Habashneh was made Interior Minister.  A 
number of ministries were split, expanding the size of the 
cabinet by three to 29 members. 
 
¶2.  (U)  New members of the cabinet are: 
 
¶A.  (C)  Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs and 
Minister of Administrative Development Mohammad Halaiqa: 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in Shioukh in 1951, Halaiqa 
obtained his B.Sc. in chemistry from the University of Jordan 
in 1976 and a Ph.D. in industrial chemistry from University 
of Leeds in the U.K.  At the Amman Chamber of Industry, he 
served as director-general (1990-92) and director (1992-3). 
He is past assistant secretary-general (1993-94) of the 
Higher Council for Science and Technology and one-time 
director-general of the Jordan Export Development Corporation 
(1994-97).  From 1997 he was secretary-general of the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade and later its Minister.  He 
then served as Minister of State for National Economy. 
Halaiqa also served as Jordan,s chief negotiator for 
accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) and is 
generally regarded as one of the keenest economic minds in 
the country.  The Embassy has a high opinion of his 
professionalism, as demonstrated during successive rounds of 
WTO talks. 
 
¶B.  (U)  Minister of State for Legal Affairs Abed Shakhanbeh: 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Madaba in 1950, Shakhanbeh 
obtained his B.A. in law from Damascus University in 1971. 
He earned his M.A. in law from the University of Jordan in 
1987 and a Ph.D. from Cairo University in 1992.  He worked in 
the Ministry of Justice from 1973 until 1992 when he was 
appointed secretary-general of the Inspection and Control 
Department.  For the past eight years, Shakhanbeh has served 
as director of the department. 
 
¶C.  (U)  Minister of Parliamentary Affairs Tawfiq Kreishan: 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Ma an in 1947, Kreishan 
obtained his B.Sc. in accounting and business administration 
from the Arab University of Beirut in 1972.  He served as 
director of the accounts department at the Jordan Petroleum 
Refinery Company and, as a deputy in GOJ,s 12th Parliament 
(1993-97), served as a member of the Foreign Affairs, 
Agricultural and Water Affairs, and Rural and Badia Affairs 
Committees.  He was Minister of Municipal, Rural, and 
Environmental Affairs in 1994 and 1997. 
 
¶D.  (U)  Minister of the Interior Samir Habashneh: 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Bethlehem in 1951, Habashneh 
earned his B.Sc. in Agricultural Engineering from Baghdad 
University in 1974.  Upon graduation, he worked in the 
cooperative society and then as a consultant at the Ministry 
of Youth in 1992.  He became a deputy in the 12th Parliament 
(1993-97) for Karak, was appointed Minister of Culture in 
1995, and became a senator in 2001.  Habashneh was imprisoned 
in 1976 for four years for links to a leftist group during a 
ban on political parties.  He replaces Ghaftan Majali, 
perhaps in response to allegations by the Islamic Action 
Front (IAF) and unsuccessful candidates of irregularities in 
the June 17 Parliamentary elections.  Others say his 
appointment was aimed at easing anger toward a government 
widely criticized for allegedly curbing public freedoms, 
including restrictions on street protests in support of Iraq 
and the Palestinians during the last three years.  (see ref A 
for further commentary) 
 
¶E.  (C)  Minister of Information Dr. Nabil Sharif: 
 
Muslim, West Banker.  Born in Al Arish, Egypt, in 1952, 
Sharif obtained his B.A. in English literature from Kuwait 
University in 1977 and his M.A. and Ph.D. in the same field 
from Indiana University (1981, 1982).  He taught English in 
Kuwait in the late 1970s and was an assistant professor of 
English literature first at Yarmouk University (1982-87) and 
later at the University of Jordan (1987-91).  He worked as 
the cultural affairs editor at Ad Dustour newspaper (1988-92) 
and as a columnist for Jordan's Jerusalem Star (1985-88), 
papers owned by the Sharif family.  For the past 15 years, he 
has contributed a regular column to Ad Dustour and has been 
its editor-in-chief since 1992.  He is the only Arab board 
member of the Paris-based World Editors Forum and has 
published a number of books in both English and Arabic. 
Sharif is well known to the Embassy and can be characterized 
as a secular leftist or pan-Arabist in his political outlook. 
 His paper has taken a generally critical stance toward U.S. 
policies in the region, in particular during the war in Iraq 
when his paper ran banner headlines in red accentuating the 
resistance against U.S. forces and Iraqi civilian casualties. 
 He has expressed to PA offices a view that the government 
should divest its media holdings and dismantle the Ministry 
of Information as a way to encourage press freedom, but 
Embassy does not anticipate much movement on those issues 
even with him in the Minister's chair. 
¶F.  (C)  Minister of Health Dr. Hakem Qadi: 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Mafraq in 1947, Qadi obtained 
his B.Sc. M.Sc. in medicine in 1972 and 1974 from Ein Shams 
University in Cairo.  He received his Ph.D. in the same field 
from the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland and served at 
the Royal Medical Services from 1972 until his retirement as 
a major general in 2000.  Qadi, until his appointment, had 
worked in a number of private hospitals and headed the King 
Hussein Medical Center.  Qadi's service at the Center was, by 
some accounts, undistinguished.  This is his first government 
appointment.  (see ref A for further commentary) 
 
¶G.  (C)  Minister of Industry and Trade Dr. Mohammad Abu 
Hammour: 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Salt in 1961, Abu Hammour 
obtained his B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. in economics from 
Yarmouk University (1984, 1990, 1997).  He worked at the 
Central Bank of Jordan (1987-98) and the University of 
Jordan, where he was a part-time lecturer and member of 
committees discussing Master,s dissertations.  For several 
years, he worked in a number of offices at the Finance 
Ministry before becoming its secretary-general in late 2000 
-- a position which he held until his appointment.  Abu 
Hammour is very well known to the embassy as a serious, if 
perhaps not brilliant, financial technocrat.  He is extremely 
hard working and was highly respected by the IMF in his 
finance ministry job.  He is a master of budget management 
and a strong supporter of economic reforms.  He has been 
instrumental in successfully pushing the military pension 
reform plan, balancing the political influence of the 
military, and reducing the budget deficit to a sustainable 
level. 
 
¶H.  (C)  Minister of Environment Dr. Hisham Gharaibeh: 
 
Muslim, East Banker.  Born in Irbid in 1948, Gharaibeh 
obtained a B.Sc. from the Faculty of Commerce in Alexandria, 
Egypt, in 1970.  He earned an M.B.A. and Ph.D. in business 
administration from the University of Texas (1974, 1979).  He 
served as a professor in administration and then became dean 
of the economics and administrative sciences department.  He 
worked as a consultant for the Arab Organization for 
Administrative Development and as a consultant for several 
Arab and international organizations, including the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF).  Until his appointment, he 
served as Vice-President of Yarmouk University from 2000. 
Embassy feels that while his experience in matters of 
environmental affairs is arguably limited, his extensive 
managerial background may help the nascent ministry (formed 
in January of this year) to develop the proper 
infrastructure, personnel, and organizational chart. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Former National Economy Minister Samer Tawil was 
made Minister of Tourism and Antiquities -* a portfolio that 
he took over from Nader Dahabi, who until Sunday used to be 
minister of both tourism and transport.  Dahabi retains only 
the latter post.  Mohammad Adwan lost the Information 
portfolio to Sharif but retained the post of Minister of 
State for Political Affairs and acquired the new position of 
Minister of State for Prime Ministry Affairs.  Rowaida 
Maaitah, Minister of Social Development, remains the only 
woman in the cabinet to the dismay of activists who hoped for 
an increase in the number of women in government after the 
introduction of a six-seat women's quota in the current Lower 
House. 
 
¶4.  (U)  In line with the tradition of sitting governments 
stepping down after the election of a new Lower House of 
Parliament, Abul Ragheb tendered his resignation on Sunday. 
Parliament,s extraordinary session, which began 16 July, 
will discuss a number of the 230 temporary laws passed by the 
Abul Ragheb government during a two-year parliamentary hiatus. 
HALE