This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LAGOS 000543 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON SCUL NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: DEATH OF LAGOS TRADITIONAL RULER 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  The death last week of Oba Adeyinka 
Oyekan highlights the role traditional rulers still 
play in Nigerian society.  Appointing an Oba's 
successor (a traditional Yoruba king) is often 
contentious, and the royal palace of Lagos was already 
filled by intrigue as the 92 year old Oba's health 
failed over the past several months.  As events 
surrounding Oba Oyekan's death and burial unfold, Lagos 
security measures have been tightened.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
----------------------------------------- 
OBA OYEKAN:  HALLMARK OF A YORUBA MONARCH 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
¶2.  In Yorubaland, an oba's death is an event that 
thrives on myth and rumor, while the truth lies 
somewhere in-between.  According to age-old Yoruba 
belief, Oba Adeyinka Oyekan has not died; he has passed 
away, transposing to another plane to join his 
ancestors.  An oba has power over life and death ("iku 
baba yeye").  In his palace, "death" is a forbidden 
word.  An oba must never see a corpse or attend burial 
ceremonies.  Despite an oba's seeming invincibility and 
immortality, when one's death becomes reality, several 
weeks may pass before the news is publicized. 
 
 
¶3.  So it was for Oba Adeyinka Oyekan, the 18th monarch 
of Lagos.  On March 7, he reportedly died after a brief 
illness.  Born on June 30, 1911, Oba Oyekan was the 
grandson of the late Oba Adeyinka Oyekan 1, the 12th 
Oba of Lagos.  He assumed the throne in 1965 after a 
protracted ascension battle that was finally resolved 
at the Privy Council in England.  Oba Oyekan enjoyed a 
preeminent position among all other traditional rulers 
in Lagos State as the permanent chairman of the Lagos 
State Council of Chiefs for many years.  His tenure 
marked a turning point in the history of obaship in 
Lagos.  He worked hard to promote unity among 
Lagosians, irrespective of their ethnic backgrounds, 
and he was highly respected by his people for his 
advocacy of peace and progress in the state. 
 
 
----------------- 
OBAS IN DEMOCRACY 
----------------- 
 
 
¶4.  In the past, party affiliation played a prominent 
role in government dealings with traditional rulers. 
In the First Republic, two prominent traditional rulers 
were even dethroned for their political beliefs or 
party affiliations.  In the Second Republic, party 
affiliation and political considerations played a key 
role in the selection of traditional rulers by state 
governments.  Successive governments in Nigeria, 
military and civilian, have shown enormous interest in 
traditional institutions.  This is due in part to the 
power traditional rulers wield among their people. 
 
 
¶5.  Under today's Nigerian democracy, political parties 
and individuals often rely on traditional rulers to 
achieve political objectives.  Traditional rulers are 
careful to refrain from stating their political 
preferences publicly, fearing this would be 
counterproductive should an opposition party take 
power.  Their most potent weapon remains the chieftancy 
titles they bestow upon sons and daughters they deem 
deserving.  Only the oba can convey  traditional 
titles, which are still very important and relevant in 
Nigerian politics.  The manner in which these titles 
are awarded leaves no question about the ruler's 
intentions.  They are often meant to promote the 
political, economic and social interests of those who 
seek them.  Not having a title like chief, otunba, or 
asiwaju precede one's name is a major disadvantage in 
South-West politics. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
TRADITIONAL RITES, SECURITY, AND FILLING THE THRONE 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
 
¶6.  Various rituals follow the death of an important 
oba in Yorubaland.  Oracles are consulted to determine 
which rituals should be performed.  Most of these 
rituals are shrouded in secrecy and better carried out 
late at night, away from the public's prying eyes. 
Tradition holds that an oba's burial must be 
accompanied by human sacrifice.  The oracle determines 
when the oba's burial should take place and the type of 
sacrifice that should accompany it.  The delay in 
announcing an oba's demise, and the curfew imposed 
afterwards, traditionally enabled palace hands to 
obtain persons to be sacrificed.  Rumors are already 
circulating that at least nine other souls must 
accompany Oba Oyekan in his transitional journey. 
E.O. 1295: N/A 
SUBJEC: NIGERIA: DEATH OF LAGOS TRADITIONAL RULER 
Maret closures are an important part of the burial 
process.  Officially, the closures mark respect for 
late oba.  People generally believe, however, that the 
markets are closed to ensure successful curfews.  Lagos 
markets routinely operate late into the night; their 
closure encourages people to remain indoors during 
curfew. 
 
 
¶7.  COMMENT.  Oba Oyekan's death has opened a new phase 
in the Lagos obaship throne.  Traditional Lagos ruling 
houses already hold divergent views about which house 
should produce the next Oba.  Over the coming months, 
succession disputes among the houses will be a major 
media spectacle.  Eventually, the disputes may result 
in litigation, proving that in Nigeria, time-honored 
traditions and modern institutions blend to weave a 
complicated societal and cultural fabric. END COMMENT. 
 
 
HINSON-JONES