This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS YEREVAN 002891 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/GAC, EUR/PPD SRUEDY, EUR/CACEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KHIV EAID KPAO SOCI TBIO KSCA AM
SUBJECT: Yerevan's commemoration of World AIDS Day 
 
REFS: STATE 323552; STATE 326263 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: Per reftels, Yerevan participated in 
several activities focused on raising AIDS awareness in 
Armenia, including an online chat, the launching of a 
website and an information seminar on the facts about 
HIV/AIDS.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. On December 1, Ambassador Ordway kicked off an 
online chat and AIDS awareness seminar at an ECA-funded 
Armenian School Connectivity Program internet computer 
center.  The online session linked forty students and 
their health education teachers in nine regions with 
experts from UNDP, World Vision and local NGOs. 
Ambassador Ordway sent a message highlighting the 
importance of knowing the facts about HIV/AIDS and 
education's power as a tool to fight the spread of the 
disease.  The experts then took over for an hour-long 
question and answer session.  Ambassador Ordway also 
took questions from media present about US policies and 
initiatives in the global fight on AIDS.  Seven 
television stations included his comments and footage 
from the chat during their prime-time newscasts. 
 
¶3.  PAS attended a presentation of the launch of an 
informational website about HIV/AIDS hosted through the 
ECA-funded Internet Access and Training Program. IREX, 
the project implementer, invited members of the NGO and 
international donor community along with local health 
officials to attend, listen to a presentation by a 
local AIDS awareness youth NGO and participate in a 
roundtable discussion on the HIV/AIDS situation in 
Armenia. 
 
¶4.  PAS attended an AIDS awareness seminar for 
Community Connections alumni hosted at the ECA-funded 
Educational Information Center.  The APAO opened the 
session with a few comments on the importance of 
understanding that AIDS can happen to anyone and that 
while Armenia has not suffered from a high rate of HIV 
infection, only widespread education about AIDS/HIV 
prevention will keep it that way.  A guest speaker from 
the National AIDS Prevention Center introduced 
materials and resources developed by the center.  A 
Peace Corps Health Volunteer discussed HIV/AIDS-related 
projects and activities in Armenia. 
 
¶5.  PAS also translated Secretary Powell's World AIDS 
Day message into Armenian and distributed it among the 
media.  His message was covered by most television 
stations, posted by Arminfo news agency in full and 
published in two major dailies, Hayastani Hanrapetutiun 
and AYB-FE, in part. 
 
ORDWAY