This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T COLOMBO 000447 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/SA, DS/DSS/ITA AND SA/INS 
ISLAMABAD PLEASE PASS LAHORE 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL:  1.6 X1, X6 
TAGS: ASEC AEMR PTER CASC CE
SUBJECT:  COLOMBO EAC MEETING MARCH 17, 2003 
 
REF:  (A) Colombo 399, (B) STATE 69234 
 
¶1.  (U) Classified by S.V. Wright, Regional Security 
Officer, reason 1.5 (C) and (D). 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On March 17, 2003 Colombo Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) met to further discuss development of our 
security posture as we approach probable conflict in Iraq. 
Ambassador chaired the EAC. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Ambassador informed the EAC of his request 
that the Sri Lanka police provide armed officers at all 
official residences.  RSO added that he had met with the 
Inspector General of Police and obtained his agreement to 
provide the officers.  The EAC (though cognizant of the 
potential management difficulties armed officers might 
present) approved the recommendation. 
 
¶4.  (S) The DCM briefed the EAC on the status of Iraqi 
intelligence and other personnel in Sri Lanka (reftel A). 
The DCM reported that the GSL decided it would not expel 
Iraqi officers, but opted instead to call in the Iraqi 
Charge.  The Minister of Foreign Affairs met with the Iraqi 
Charge on March 14 and told him in that inappropriate 
activity would be dealt with harshly.  In addition, the GSL 
has imposed a visa requirement on all Iraqi nationals. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The committee agreed to several other steps to 
take effect on the day of conflict in Iraq: 
 
- On the day conflict begins, Post 1 will issue an "all- 
call" on the Embassy E&E network.  All American staff will 
be instructed to stay home.  The four Embassy LAVs will be 
dispatched to the residences to pick up essential Embassy 
staff.  An EAC will be convened that morning.  LAVs will be 
used to pick up all Americans on subsequent days until the 
EAC decides otherwise.  (DATT and IBB will use their LAVs to 
transport their respective employees.) 
 
- All dependant children will be kept home from school on 
the first day of the conflict.  Subsequently, a local guard 
mobile patrol will escort both school busses to the Overseas 
School. 
 
- The Consular section will suspend visa services on the 
first day in order to focus on U.S. citizen services. 
Consular will also forward the warden message to all Amcits 
in country consistent with the language provided in reftel B. 
 
- Travel to the Eastern part of Sri Lanka will once again 
be restricted until the EAC can gauge public sentiment in 
that part of the country. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The EAC also discussed the issue of USAID and 
Embassy PSC American staff.  The EAC will discuss whether to 
include PSC staff in the LAV transportation and Sri Lanka 
police coverage only after the conflict begins and public 
reaction is measured. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The EAC agreed to meet again as needed. 
 
WILLS