This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L TEGUCIGALPA 000548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC, PM, EB 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/27/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PBTS PHUM PREL PTER ECON PINR ES HO
SUBJECT: HOSTAGE SITUATION IN NAHUATERIQUE POCKET ON BORDER 
WITH EL SALVADOR ENDS PEACEFULLY 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission Roger D. Pierce for reasons 
1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  On February 25 at around 10:00am a Honduran 
patrol comprised of seven police and four military personnel 
was surrounded by approximately 400 compesinos in the 
Nahuaterique pocket on the border with El Salvador.  The 
incident occurred after the patrol had confiscated a number 
of chainsaws that were being used for illegal logging 
activities.  After a 27 hour standoff, and intervention by 
both Government of Honduras (GOH) and Government of El 
Salvador (GOES) officials, the incident ended without 
violence.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) According to information provided by the Honduran 
Ministry of Public Security, the Honduran Armed Forces, and 
press accounts on February 25 at around 10:00am a Honduran 
patrol comprised of seven police and four military personnel 
was surrounded by approximately 400 people near the town of 
Paso Mono, inside the Nahuaterique pocket on the border with 
El Salvador.  Local residents also reportedly destroyed a 
small wooden bridge (the only land route from Honduras) 
thereby preventing the patrol from leaving without entering 
El Salvador.  While the patrol was unable to withdraw, GOH 
personnel maintained control of their weapons and after a 
tense beginning were treated well by the local population. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The incident apparently occurred after the patrol 
had confiscated three chainsaws which were being used for 
illegal logging activities. On February 18, a similar patrol 
had confiscated illegal logging equipment, which resulted in 
a minor scuffle with local residents.  The community, made up 
largely of Salvadoran citizens who remained on the Honduran 
side of the border after the 1992 International Court of 
Justice ruling, has reportedly traditionally made its 
livelihood from logging activities.  Recent efforts to 
enforce Honduran law in the area have meet with considerable 
opposition due to the fact that other means of income are 
very limited. 
 
¶4. (C) The informal leader of the community, Santos Tulio 
Hernandez, is reportedly a former member of the Ejercito 
Revolutionario Popular, one of the strongest elements of the 
FMLN that operated in the Perquin-Torola area. Many of the 
residents in the surrounding area were also apparently 
guerrilla sympathizers in the 1980's.  After preventing the 
patrol from leaving, Hernandez demanded discussions with both 
GOH and GOES officials concerning the community's grievances. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) On February 26, a GOH/GOES bilateral commission met 
in the town of Zancudo, Honduras to address the villagers 
demands and secure the release of the 11 patrol members. 
Taking part in the discussions were Honduran Police 
Commissioner Coralia Rivera, local military commanders, and 
representatives from both the GOH and GOES foreign 
ministries.  Sources report that officials involved in the 
mediation effort were able to secure the release of the 
patrol around noon after promising to address the community's 
needs. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Many of the residents of Nahuaterique, although now 
officially living in Honduras, remain citizens of El Salvador 
and continue to hold strong cultural and family ties to El 
Salvador.  Most local transportation is provided by El 
Salvador, villagers do most of their shopping in El Salvador, 
and El Salvador continues to be a large market for Honduran 
lumber. 
 
¶7. (C) COMMENT:  This incident highlights the need for 
demarcation of the border between the two countries. 
Honduras can be expected to use this incident to push for 
quicker action in this area.  Honduran authorities are also 
likely to attempt to assert greater control of the area 
through a larger official presence. The GOH will find it 
difficult, however, to enforce anti-logging in this poor 
region where Honduran law has not been regularly enforced. 
 
Palmer