This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS COLOMBO 000535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (FOR JWALLER); SA/PD (LJIRWIN, LSCENSNY, 
WREINCKENS); SSA/PAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT:  MEDIA PLAY:  IRAQ 
 
 
¶1. Sri Lanka's English front pages found room for only two 
war-related headlines:  "US-led forces destroy Iraqi 
column" and "US-led troops poised to enter Baghdad as week 
two begins."  The vernacular dailies, by contrast, splashed 
the war across all front pages with headlines such as "Iraq 
`Republican' military force equipped with 1,000 tanks is 
moving south ... to counter attack coalition forces coming 
to invade Baghdad," "1,000 US paratroopers occupy Iraqi air 
force camp ... largest operation in ten years," and 
"Saddam's special task force to protect Baghdad" (Sinhala 
dailies); and "Special forces under Saddam's son move to 
protect Baghdad," "30,000 more US forces rush to the Gulf," 
and "New war front in Northern Iraq" as "1,000 U.S. 
soldiers land by parachute." 
 
¶2. Under the headline "What's the role of the UN?" the 
ISLAND (opposition English daily, islandwide circulation) 
discusses a "basic question that is being asked amongst 
western powers ...: who rules Iraq if the Saddam Hussein 
regime is eliminated?.  The ISLAND hopes -- but doubts -- 
that the "UN has to step in at some stage.  The sooner, the 
better."  Excerpts: 
 
"With the end of the Cold War and the disappearance of one 
superpower, the prospects of the UN playing a more 
significant role in world affairs was much greater.  Indeed 
President George Bush (Sr.) played according to UN rules 
when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait by putting together a 
coalition of nations in accordance with UN resolutions and 
driving the invader out of Kuwait.  But the son has acted 
like a bull in a china shop.  Whereas even radical, usually 
anti-American Arab states, joined the father's coalition 
... Saddam, who has been hated in many Arab countries, is 
being cheered and volunteers queuing up to fight for him. 
 
"The war in the past few days has amply demonstrated 
American power to win it but President Bush has failed to 
convince the world that it is a just war even though he is 
attempting to rid Iraq of a bloody dreaded dictator. 
 
"The UN has to step in at some stage. The sooner, the 
better." 
 
¶3. Under "Tears and sorrow as a result of war" VIRAKESARI 
(independent Tamil daily, islandwide circulation) laments 
the impact of the war, here in Sri Lanka and there in Iraq. 
Excerpts: 
 
"While the U.S. war on Iraq has brought hardship to Iraqis, 
effects of war are being experienced in Sri Lanka now. 
 
"While a sad situation is being created for the hundreds of 
thousands of Sri Lankan workers in the Middle East to 
return to Sri Lanka owing to losing their jobs, the prices 
of the essential items will go up in price because of the 
price hike of the petroleum products. 
 
"With the fall of job opportunities in Middle East, which 
brings most of the foreign exchange, Sri Lanka will be 
further affected the fall in tea exports.  70 percent of 
the tea recently offered in auction remained unsold.  This 
is a big blow to our economy.... 
 
"After killing ... attacking with the latest weapons and 
... and destroying buildings, villages, and cities, 
President Bush says with a smile that freedom for Iraqis is 
dawning....  Bush, building castles upon the lives of 
innocent Iraqi people and against the opposition of the 
people world all over, has requested the Congress to 
allocate $75 billion for the war. 
 
"Another sorrowful chapter in the history of the sufferings 
of the century is being written today." 
 
Wills