This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L THE HAGUE 002313 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/15/2013 
TAGS: PHUM CH NL
SUBJECT: DUTCH REACTION TO NONPAPER ON HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHINA 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 256542 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Mary E. Daly for Reasons 1.5 (b and 
d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: PolOff delivered nonpaper text on human 
rights in China (Ref A) to Dutch MFA Deputy Head of East Asia 
Department Gerrie Willems, and Senior Policy Advisor on Human 
Rights in Asia Sandra Pellegrom on September 12.  The Dutch 
are pleased the U.S. is initiating early discussions on the 
issue, and "completely concur with the U.S. assessment." 
Pellegrom said serious discussions on a resolution may begin 
as late as January or February 2004 in the EU, and a clear 
U.S. position will have a significant influence on the 
contentious EU decision making process.  The Dutch 
recommended the U.S. approach both EU and non-EU members for 
support, and suggested the U.S. push for improvements in 
specific areas of human rights, such as the use of torture, a 
visit by the Special Rapporteur, arbitrary detentions, and 
release of more political prisoners.  Pellegrom said the 
annual review of the EU China-Human Rights Dialogue will be a 
good indicator of the EU position, and said EU was asking 
members' views on the U.S. memorandum on human rights in 
China.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) PolOff delivered nonpaper text on human rights in 
China (Ref A) to Dutch MFA Deputy Head of East Asia 
Department Gerrie Willems, and Senior Policy Advisor on Human 
Rights in Asia Sandra Pellegrom on September 12.  The Dutch 
are pleased the U.S. is initiating early discussions on the 
issue, and "completely concur with the U.S. assessment" of 
the deteriorating human rights situation in China.  Pellegrom 
made it clear that no decision would be made by the EU until 
much later, and serious discussions would begin as late as 
January or February 2004.  Although the Dutch tend to favor a 
harder line on China human rights than others in the EU, they 
will follow the EU consensus.  Pellegrom noted that China is 
a contentious country in terms of EU decision making and a 
clear U.S. position will have a significant influence on the 
EU process.  Over the last year, the Dutch have steadily 
applied pressure in the EU, but it has "proved virtually 
impossible to get the EU to take initiative." Pellegrom and 
Willems believe that if the U.S. seriously tables a 
resolution, it will help to bring the EU closer to consensus. 
 
 
¶3. (C) The Dutch recommend that the U.S. approach both EU and 
non-EU members for support, beginning with the bigger EU 
member states.  Pellegrom said the Dutch MFA thinks every 
Minister should raise the human rights issue during 
interactions with Beijing, and noted FM de Hoop Scheffer did 
so during his August 24-26 visit to China. Prior to FM de 
Hoop Scheffer's visit, the Dutch Embassy presented the PRC 
with an EU list of human rights cases, to which the Chinese 
said they would respond in writing.  Willems, who just 
returned from a three-year posting in Beijing, opined China's 
accession to the WTO, its permanent status on the UNSC, and 
the broadening of its international role, have led China to 
take its international responsibility seriously.  She noted 
that if you compared China's human rights progress in five 
year  increments, then a pattern of positive change would 
emerge.  Willems said China is "truly a country in 
transition," and warned against pushing Beijing so hard that 
"a door could be closed."  Both Willems and Pellegrom agree 
that a dialogue is important, but feel the Chinese must live 
up to their commitments. 
 
¶4. (C) The Dutch recommended the U.S. approach both EU and 
non-EU members for support, and suggested the U.S. push for 
improvements in specific areas of human rights, such as the 
use of torture, a visit by the Special Rapporteur, arbitrary 
detentions, and release of more political prisoners. 
Pellegrom believes that if the U.S. concentrates on "doable 
things," there may be a chance of getting concrete change 
more quickly.  She noted that the release of political 
prisoners "doesn't damage the principles of government" in 
Beijing.  None of the EU members want to give an early 
indication of their position, but Pellegrom said the annual 
review of the EU China-Human Rights Dialogue should be 
completed by the end of this year, and it will be a good 
indicator of the EU position.  She also noted the EU has 
sought members' reaction to the U.S. memorandum on human 
rights in China, and indicated the Presidency reserved the 
right to respond to the U.S. until after the issue had been 
discussed with its EU partners in the next COHOM on October 
10, 2003. 
SOBEL