This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L OTTAWA 001539 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/29/2013 
TAGS: PREL MARR CA
SUBJECT: MISSILE DEFENSE: CANADA ANNOUNCES DECISION TO 
ENTER NEGOTIATIONS 
 
REF: OTTAWA 1437 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Political Minister Counselor Brian Flora, 
Reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
THIS IS AN ACTION REQUEST - SEE PARA 6. 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY AND COMMENT: The Canadian Government announced 
on May 29 that it has decided to enter into discussions with 
the U.S. on missile defense participation.  This decision 
represents a dramatic shift in Canadian policy on missile 
defense, which was generally viewed in a negative light here 
prior to 2002 because of arms control concerns.  Over the 
past several months, Defense Minister McCallum and Foreign 
Minister Graham were able to convince Prime Minister Chretien 
and most of the Liberal Party caucus that participation in 
missile defense would be in Canada's national interest. 
Their strongest argument was that since the U.S. was 
proceeding with missile defense deployment, Canada would be 
jeopardizing its defense relationship with us, in particular 
NORAD, if it did not join.  Now that Canada has taken the 
plunge, we need to work with them to reach an agreement that 
keeps our defense partnership on track. END SUMMARY AND 
COMMENT. 
 
¶2. (U) Canadian Defense Minister McCallum announced on May 29 
that the GoC has decided to enter into discussions with the 
U.S. on Canadian participation in missile defense.  McCallum 
said this decision was motivated by a desire to protect 
Canadian lives and to preserve NORAD's role in the defense of 
North America.  He specifically noted that Canada would like 
the North American missile defense mission to be assigned to 
NORAD, vice NORTHCOM.  McCallum also reiterated Canada's 
opposition to weaponization of space, and said that any 
agreement on Canadian participation in missile defense would 
still have to be blessed by Cabinet. 
 
¶3. (C) Foreign Affairs (DFAIT) and National Defense (DND) 
contacts told us that the decision to enter missile defense 
negotiations was taken at the May 26 Cabinet meeting, but 
that Prime Minister Chretien had planned to announce the 
decision during his ongoing visit to Europe.  The government 
changed plans because the opposition Canadian Alliance Party 
introduced a motion in the House of Commons on May 29 
affirming its support for NORAD as a counter to ballistic 
missile threats.  The GoC decided to go ahead and announce 
its decision in response to the Canadian Alliance motion. 
The announcement was roundly criticized by Bloc Quebecois and 
New Democratic Party MPs.  (COMMENT: We anticipate sniping 
from hardcore Liberal Party opponents as well, including 
Heritage Minister and Liberal leadership candidate Sheila 
Copps.  END COMMENT) 
 
¶4. (C) Ron Hoffmann, DFAIT Director for Defense and Security 
Policy, stressed to us that NORAD's role in missile defense 
was the key issue in the Cabinet debate over entering 
negotiations.  Several Cabinet officials argued that the 
future of Canada's role in North American defense would be 
determined by NORAD's involvement in the missile defense 
system.  Other issues included territorial coverage, 
industrial cooperation, and weaponization of space.  Hoffmann 
told us that the GoC recognizes the U.S. is not going to 
agree to any limits on future direction of the missile 
defense system, and that the GoC would like to "park" the 
space weaponization issue and not have it become a sticking 
point in negotiations.  He likened this issue to Canada's 
position on nuclear disarmament, which it supports while also 
subscribing to a NATO nuclear strategy. 
 
¶5. (C) Hoffmann told us that the GoC would like to begin 
negotiations as soon as possible.  As a preliminary step, 
Assistant Deputy Ministers Jim Wright (DFAIT) and Ken Calder 
(DND) would like to visit Washington and lay out Canada's 
decision and negotiating mandate for senior officials at 
State and Defense.  Hoffmann proposed this visit taking place 
on June 5 or 6.  The GoC would then propose to send its full 
negotiating team to Washington on June 13 or 17 to begin 
discussions.  We cautioned that the U.S. side might need more 
time before starting talks.  Hoffmann urged us to at least 
agree to an early visit by Wright and Calder so that they 
could lay out the GoC approach. 
 
¶6. (C) ACTION REQUEST: Please advise on availability of U.S. 
officials for meetings with Wright and Calder. 
CELLUCCI