This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ABUJA 001955 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/14/2013 
TAGS: PREL SOCI NI AID
SUBJECT: KANO STATE GOVERNOR STRATEGY TO IMPLEMENT POLIO 
VACCINATION PROGRAM 
 
CLASSIFIED BY CHARGE ROGER MEECE.  REASONS 1.5 (B) AND (D). 
 
 
¶1. (C) During a November 3 courtesy call on Kano State 
Governor Ibrahim Shekarau, the CDA expressed concern 
about reports that polio vaccination programs in the 
state have stalled.  The CDA noted that allegations 
from various quarters about impure vaccine, Western 
efforts to use vaccines to render recipients infertile 
and the like, are at best badly misinformed or being 
put forward by people with other agendas. In either 
case, it would be a tragedy for children to suffer and 
polio to spread as a result.  The Governor nodded and 
took the CDA aside for a private word out of earshot 
of all but his Deputy. 
 
 
¶2. (C) The Governor quickly and firmly expressed his 
understanding of the health problem and his support for 
the vaccination program.  He noted, however, that he 
confronted a political problem.  With allegations coming 
from various quarters, he could not simply impose a view, 
and in any event that would not result in troubled 
parents coming forward with their children. 
Complicating the picture, he noted that the vaccination 
program had in a number of cases recruited young men as 
vaccinators who were identified by local residents as 
unemployed ruffians, further reinforcing doubts about 
the vaccination program's bona fides.  Therefore, he 
explained, he designated a committee, including experts 
and others likely to be sympathetic, to study the issue 
and produce an authoritative report.  The report is 
expected very soon, but the Governor acknowledged that 
he had a pretty good idea of its content already.  As 
expected, it would not find any evidence to support 
allegations that the vaccines contained substances 
planted by Western interests to render children 
infertile, or anything else substantiating criticism 
of the program.  The Governor also broadly hinted that 
he has been consulting with other leaders in the State 
to be able to ensure a successful program once the 
report has been published. 
 
 
¶3. (C) The Charge observed that given accusations of 
Western bad intentions, it would not necessarily be 
productive to issue public statements on the subject from 
the U.S. Embassy.  He observed, however, that it would be 
useful for UNICEF, the State Government, and other 
concerned stakeholders to coordinate a public information 
program that would address as fully as possible concerns 
and questions.  The Governor agreed, and pointed out that 
traditional leaders should play a role.  The Charge also 
emphasized that the U.S. Mission would welcome any 
suggestions or thoughts the Governor or his staff might 
have as to how the U.S. could be most helpful. 
 
 
¶4. (U) USAID Nigeria continues to work closely with the 
Federal Ministry of Health, the Northern Governors, and 
State Ministries of Health and Civil Society to address 
the polio issues.  USAID has supported the participation 
of Northern States' traditional rulers to emphasize the 
critical importance of eradicating polio in Nigeria. 
In September 2002, the traditional rulers signed a 
communique to support the eradication of polio in Nigeria 
and they agreed to allow their communities to participate 
in the National Immunization Days (NIDs) held during the 
holy month of Ramadan.  Subsequent to the signing, 
issues arose prompting the states to reassess their 
participation in NIDS in the north.  USAID funds and 
implements training of the vaccinator teams and 
supervisors for NIDs in eight of the most seriously 
polio endemic states in the north, including Kano, 
the epicenter of the polio epidemic.  USAID also leads 
the National Social Mobilization Committee of the 
National Program on Immunization and has forged close 
relationships with the Kano state Government as a 
result of USAID's child survival activities in nine 
of the 44 local government areas (LGAs) in the state. 
These efforts led to a decrease in the number of wild 
polio cases recorded until recently when resurgence was 
noted and the number of cases increased.  As a result 
of the latest outbreaks, the donors, including USAID, 
have encouraged the FMOH and states to refocus their 
efforts on greater state and community LGAs.  Kano 
has now adopted the USAID approach to primary health 
care to children under five for their entire state, 
including a component for the state's approach to polio 
eradication. 
 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: The Governor's understanding of the 
problem and personal commitment to the polio vaccination 
program seems clear.  We understand that the next round 
of polio vaccinations is scheduled to get underway in 
December in Kano State.  According to press reports, 
the Governor's committee report may be out by the end 
of this week, providing a good local basis for a strong 
public push as to the need and benefits of the 
vaccinations.  It seems clear that at least some of 
those throwing up the allegations know better and have 
no real interest in the campaign per se, but are 
opportunistically seizing on the program and 
people's fears for their own narrow interests. 
 
 
End comment. 
MEECE