This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L YEREVAN 003034 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/18/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL AM AJ TU
SUBJECT: OSKANYAN-GUL MEETING RAISES HOPES OF LIMITED 
BORDER OPENING 
 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR JOHN ORDWAY FOR REASONS 1.5 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  Foreign Minister Oskanyan told Ambassador 
that Turkish Foreign Minister Gul had indicated to him in a 
December 5 meeting that Turkey would open its border with 
Armenia to the two country's diplomatic passport holders as 
early as January 2004.  The two foreign ministers also 
discussed regional security issues and Nagorno-Karabakh.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Oskanyan informed the Ambassador that he expected the 
GOT to open the Armenian-Turkish border to each country's 
diplomatic passport holders as early as January 2004.  During 
their December 5 meeting in Brussels, he and Foreign Minister 
Gul discussed the 15-point plan developed by the two sides 
and agreed on this first step.  Oskanyan suggested that the 
GOT might slow the process following the December 16 vote by 
the Swiss parliament's passing an Armenian genocide 
resolution.  He said that no agreement was in place to open 
the border to third country diplomats or tourists, but even 
the limited opening discussed by Gul would put in place the 
border crossing infrastructure required by a future broader 
opening.  Oskanyan also stated that he had suggested a 
ceremonial that he and Gul meet at the border, but had 
received a non-committal answer. 
 
¶3. (C) During a previous meeting, Anahit Harutunyan, the Head 
of the MFA's Turkey Section,  confirmed that both sides 
agreed to move forward on the list of pre-established steps 
that could lead to full normalization of relations. 
According to Harutunyan, the first agreed step is the opening 
of the border for diplomatic passport holders and third 
country nationals.  She said that Oskanyan and Gul had 
discussed the logistical requirements of such an action, and 
that Gul seemed more willing than in previous discussions to 
move ahead on this step without any other pre-conditions 
being met, such as progress in the Nagorno-Karabakh 
negotiations. 
 
¶4. (C) Harutunyan said that Gul raised  Nagorno-Karabakh 
within a broader discussion of regional security issues.  Gul 
said Turkey wished to become "more decisively involved" in 
the settlement of the dispute, but did not elaborate on what 
actions the GOT would take. 
ORDWAY