This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 COLOMBO 001980 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INR/MR, I/RW, I/REC; PA 
SA/INS (CAMP, DEAN, WALLER); SA/PD (REINCKENS, SCENSNY, 
STRYKER); SSA/PAS 
 
E.O.12958:N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR OIIP CE
SUBJECT: MEDIA PLAY: SRI LANKA'S POLITICAL CRISIS CONTINUES 
 
 
¶1. Summary.  Over the weekend, English and vernacular media 
headlines focused on reaction to Norway's recent comments 
about the Sri Lankan Government's political crisis and 
their impact on the peace process.  The President's 
comments also made splashy headlines.  Meanwhile, media 
reports of the Prime Minister's stance were varied. 
Speculation about Sri Lanka's security situation and the 
economic impact of the political crisis continued to 
generate interest.  Editorial reaction was extensive in 
both the English and vernacular press.  English 
commentators covered a variety of topics.  Several urged 
civil society to take a more active role in the political 
crisis.  One daily commented, "The time has ... come for 
the civil society to wake up and... prevent the power- 
hungry politicians from pushing the country to the brink of 
disaster."  Others commented on ways to break the political 
impasse, the need for unbiased facilitators, and chastised 
the President.  For the most part, Sinhala commentators 
urged cooperation between parties, while a few wondered if 
elections were the next step.  One Sinhala daily warned, 
"We emphasize to the President and PM that they should not 
try to politically defeat each other."  Tamil editors were 
divided.  Some were vehemently opposed to cohabitation, 
while others, including the government-owned Tamil daily, 
were much more positive about a national government.  End 
summary. 
 
----- 
Headlines 
----- 
 
¶2.  English and vernacular media headlines focused on 
Norway's recent comments about the Sri Lanka Government's 
political crisis and its impact on the peace process. 
Independent English DAILY MIRROR reported (11/15), "Norway 
suspends facilitation."  Independent Sinhala daily, DIVAINA 
added (11/15),  "Norway silent on peace process and CFA 
until the crisis is solved," while independent Tamil daily, 
THINAKKURAL noted (11/15), "Norway halts facilitation until 
political crisis is settled."     Independent English 
daily, ISLAND elucidated (11/15), "Peace process difficult 
to sustain in a political vacuum - Helgessen." 
Independent and government-owned television and radio 
stations echoed these headlines (11/14).  Government-owned 
print media sang a happier song.  Government-owned English 
DAILY NEWS reported (11/15), "We won't abandon peace 
process, says Helgesen," while its sister paper, 
government-owned Tamil daily, THINAKARAN soothed (11/15), 
"No intention of dropping peace process - Norway." 
 
¶3.  Reaction to Norway's announcement was swift. 
Independent English weekly, SUNDAY LEADER's headlines 
carried LTTE and TNA reaction (11/16), "LTTE shocked at 
Norway's exit," and, "LTTE, TNA will not deal with CBK." 
Independent Tamil weekly, THINAKKURAL headlined (11/16), 
"America upset over Norway's announcement; insist that 
President and Prime Minister jointly strengthen the peace 
efforts." Independent Sinhala daily LAKBIMA echoed the 
conciliatory part of the US message (11/17), "Government 
and President should forget all differences and get 
together - urges America.' 
 
¶4.  The President's comments made splashy headlines all 
weekend.  Independent English DAILY MIRROR reported 
(11/15), "President wants national gov. for one year," 
while independent English daily, ISLAND (11/15) quoted, 
"Let Ranil continue - Chandrika."  Independent Sinhala 
daily, LANKADEEPA's headline allowed the President to 
clarify (11/15), "I did not call CFA illegal; balance of 
the peace process to Ranil."   Independent Tamil weekly, 
VIRAKESARI continued (11/16), "If no to national 
government, elections; no obstacles to peace; Defense 
Ministry will not be handed over - President." Meanwhile, 
Government-owned Tamil daily, THINAKARAN went all out to 
comfort readers (11/15), "President invites joint efforts 
of both parties to continue peace process without any party 
differences; no hindrance from the defense forces; prepared 
to give full responsibility on peace; can form a group 
inclusive of Norwegians; prepared to give a written 
assurance." 
 
¶5.  Media reports of the Prime Minister's stance were 
varied.  Independent English DAILY MIRROR offered (11/15), 
"PM offers to back CBK in continuing peace process, " but 
independent English daily, ISLAND reported (11/15), "Ranil 
calls it quits."  Independent English weekly, SUNDAY TIMES 
came up with another message entirely (11/16), "PM will 
support 'National Front':  French-style compromise proposed 
for defence matters." 
 
¶6.  Sri Lanka's security situation continued to generate 
interest.  Independent English daily, ISLAND reported 
(11/15), "All quiet in the N-E despite crisis - Monitors." 
Independent English DAILY MIRROR's headline  was calm 
(11/15), "President orders Armed Forces to maintain 
ceasefire,"  while independent Tamil weekly, VIRAKESARI was 
slightly more hawkish (11/16), "Our objective is peace that 
assures security -President to Financial Times." 
Independent English DAILY MIRROR's headline looked abroad 
for security (11/17), "Indian army on alert over Lankan 
crisis," and independent Tamil daily, THINAKKURAL, added 
(11/17), "Vajpai orders Indian Army to be vigilant on Sri 
Lanka." 
 
¶7. The economic impact of the political crisis and Norway's 
actions also made the headlines.  Independent English DAILY 
MIRROR noted (11/15), "Dissolution talk, Norway pull out 
hit stock market."  Independent English daily, ISLAND 
mourned (11/15), "Bourse plunges on negative political 
sentiment, " and independent English weekly, SUNDAY TIMES 
observed (11/16),  "Colombo stocks gyrate to political 
beat."   Independent English weekly, SUNDAY LEADER 
cautioned (11/16), "Political uncertainty leading investors 
elsewhere." 
 
----- 
Editorials 
----- 
 
¶8.  Editorial reaction was extensive in both the English 
and vernacular press.  English commentators covered a 
variety of topics.  Several urged civil society to take a 
more active role in the political crisis,  while others 
commented on ways to break the political impasse, the need 
for unbiased facilitators, and chastised the President. 
For the most part, Sinhala commentators urged cooperation 
between parties, while a few wondered if elections were the 
next step.  Tamil editors were divided.  Some were 
vehemently opposed to cohabitation, while others, including 
the government-owned Tamil daily, were much more positive 
about a national government. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Prabhakaran joins orchestra," 
independent English DAILY MIRROR commented (11/15), "The 
time has ... come for the civil society to wake up and... 
prevent the power-hungry politicians from pushing the 
country to the brink of disaster." 
 
Excerpts. 
The time has ... come for the civil society to wake up and 
do whatever possible to prevent the power-hungry 
politicians from pushing the country to the brink of 
disaster.  There are ... some organizations that continue 
to remain uncontaminated by narrow party politics.... 
The Organization of Professional Associations (OPA) is one 
such organization....  There are also business sector 
chambers and associations that remain above party politics 
and offer advice for the country's progress.  These 
organizations now have to intervene in the affairs of the 
state in a more active and dynamic manner.  They should go 
even to the extent of exerting whatever power they have, to 
pressurize the political parties to deviate from their 
narrow partisan pursuits and objectives and to act in the 
country's larger interests. 
End excerpts. 
 
 
----- Under the headline, "Mechanisms," Government-owned 
English weekender SUNDAY OBSERVER commented (11/16), "As 
the politicians quarrel, the citizens must act." 
 
Excerpts. 
There is inadequate coordinated and sustained action by 
civil society in all its forms -- from social action 
groups, community organizations and civic lobbies to 
business chambers and trade unions -- to bring pressure to 
bear on the two parties and their leaders to concretely 
manifest all their rhetoric about 'cohabitation' and 
'cooperation'.  As the politicians quarrel, the citizens 
must act.  Otherwise, a permanent peace on this island, 
whether the result of a negotiated partition or a re- 
integrated State, either federal or confederal, is only a 
remote hope, a distant dawn. 
End excerpts. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Damage Control," independent 
English weekender SUNDAY ISLAND commented (11/16), "One 
possible way out of the impasse may be to appoint a defense 
minister acceptable to both leaders ... or a small war (or 
rather peace) cabinet in which both the president and the 
prime minister will sit." 
 
Excerpts. 
One possible way out of the impasse may be to appoint a 
defense minister acceptable to both leaders ... or a small 
war (or rather peace) cabinet in which both the president 
and the prime minister will sit.  It will be responsible 
for mapping out the strategy to be followed in the peace 
process and responding to the country's defense and 
security needs.  The fact that the LTTE wishes to do 
business with Wickremesinghe does not mean that he and he 
alone should conduct that business.  All the more reason 
that Kumaratunga whom the Tigers want to distance from the 
process, must also have a role. 
End excerpts. 
----- Under the headline, "Why the Peace Bandwagon is 
stalled," independent English daily ISLAND commented that 
until (11/15), "unbiased negotiators are brought in, the 
Peace Bandwagon will remain stalled." 
 
Excerpts. 
The peace process has been stalled because the President 
and the prime minister have locked horns and unless they 
reach consensus on what can be offered to the people of the 
north and east no resolution to the problem is possible.... 
Until these main issues are resolved and unbiased 
negotiators are brought in, the Peace Bandwagon will remain 
stalled. 
End excerpts. 
 
----- Under the headline, "CBK Disarray ," independent 
English weekly, SUNDAY LEADER complained  (11/16), "By 
acting the goat, [the President] has made an ass of herself 
and landed her party in a complete pickle." 
Excerpts. 
So the President faces Hobson's choice.  She cannot 
preserve the status quo and govern; neither can she call an 
election and hope to come close to victory.  She had 
another two years to go before her term expired, and a lot 
of time to let the UNF make mistakes on which she would 
have capitalized politically.  By acting as she has done, 
she has got her party's knickers in a twist and dashed its 
electoral hopes.  By acting the goat, she has made an ass 
of herself and landed her party in a complete pickle. 
End excerpts. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Sit only to serve," independent 
Sinhala daily, DIVAINA commented (11/15), "We emphasize to 
the President and PM that they should not try to 
politically defeat each other." 
 
Excerpts. 
Norway has left.  The PM is not willing to handle the peace 
process.  The President is left alone to face the challenge 
she created on her own.  But the PM is not as pessimistic 
as the Norwegians...The need for a leader [to sit at peace 
talks] who is against a separate state, but who does 
believe in a political solution was felt by all.  All these 
issues raise a question about the impartiality of the 
Norwegians, and their fairness... We emphasize to the 
President and PM that they should not try to politically 
defeat each other. 
End excerpts. 
 
 
----- Under the headline, "Is an election the next step," 
independent Sinhala weekly,  SUNDAY LAKBIMA observed 
(11/17), "an election has become an option, because both 
parties have worked toward that." 
 
Excerpts. 
Neither party needs an election right now.  We've already 
said that.  But an election has become an option, because 
both parties have worked toward that. Both parties want the 
whole pound of flesh.  But it is the public who has to pay 
the price.  Everybody's voting rights have to be used to 
usher democracy to a few." 
End excerpts. 
 
 
----- Under the headline, "National reconciliation:  the 
biggest political joke," independent Tamil weekly, 
THINAKKURAL, observed (11/16), "National and national 
feelings are dead in this country.  It will be only a 
political comedy if the ruling party and the Opposition to 
join together." 
 
Excerpts. 
The current political crisis in the South has led to a 
power struggle, which in turn has affected the peace 
process adversely.  Since there is no time limit for the 
resumption of the peace talks, the responsibility to resume 
the peace talks lies with the UNF Government and other 
Southern political forces... The LTTE has been very firm in 
their stance once again.  The President has stepped in and 
trying to be a partner in the peace politics, extending an 
invitation to form a Government of National Reconciliation. 
As regards the Prime Minister, he and his government are 
not supporting this move, which they consider as a 
political mirage.  Even if it is formed it will be a joint 
alliance of the Sinhalese parties and not a national 
alliance.  National and national feelings are dead in this 
country.  It will be only a political comedy if the ruling 
party and the Opposition to join together. 
End excerpts. 
 
----- Under the headline, "Political Crisis of the South 
and Peace Talks," independent Tamil daily, VIRAKESARI, 
commented (11/15), "If the country wants peace the 
political crisis in the South should be amicably solved, on 
which the future of the talks heavily depend." 
 
 
Excerpts. 
LTTE Leader V. Prabaharan has made his commitment for peace 
public and has said that peace talks should resume 
immediately but it depends on the political situation in 
the South. . Although committed to peace, the government is 
unable to proceed because of President's actions and that 
she should carry forward the peace process says the Prime 
Minister. What should be the priority, National Government 
or peace talks? . UNF government's actions were very clear 
from redeeming the country from war situation and leading 
towards economic freedom, prosperity and development. . 
National Government issue is only a ploy by the President 
to disrupt peace process and is not a solution to country's 
problem accuses the government. So, who would go ahead with 
the peace process? Prime Minister promises support for 
President to continue the peace process. . Chances of 
finding a solution for peace are slipping away. . The 
President and the political parties of the South that 
propagate chauvinism should take the full blame if peace 
talks fail. . If the country wants peace the political 
crisis in the South should be amicably solved, on which the 
future of the talks heavily depend. 
End excerpts. 
 
LUNSTEAD