This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ABUJA 000902 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR JFRASER 
CAIRO FOR JMAXSTADT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/14/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM KISL NI
SUBJECT: NIGERIA: ZAK-ZAKY EMERGES FROM HIBERNATION 
 
Classified by Ambassador Howard F. Jeter.  Reasons: 
1.5 (B & D). 
 
 
¶1.  (C)  Ibrahim el-Zak-Zaky, leader of a fringe 
Nigerian Islamic sect calling for the return to 
traditional Shi'a principles, emerged over the weekend 
from a period of inactivity.  Sheikh Zak-Zaky held a 
fundraising event and public rally in Kano on May 10- 
11, attracting some media attention and drawing 
sizeable crowds of onlookers. 
 
 
¶2.  (C)  Ostensibly, the reason for his event was to 
raise money for Islamic schools to provide "functional 
education with sound Islamic background."  According 
to the BBC, over 50 million Naira was collected during 
the weekend events. 
 
 
¶3.  (C)  Emboff observed an estimated 100 vehicles 
traveling in a motorcade in Kano shouting Zak-Zaky's 
slogans.  Calling for an "end to democracy and 
beginning of Islamic governance," the vehicles paraded 
in this northern commercial center for more than two 
hours. 
 
 
¶4.  (C)  COMMENT:  Rendered irrelevant shortly after 
the fall of the Abacha regime, Zak-Zaky has been 
largely ignored due to his doctrinaire opposition to 
the implementation of political shari'a.  (NOTE:  He 
claimed shari'a was impossible without an Islamic 
regime in place.  END NOTE.) He has always 
concentrated on the social benefits of his brand of 
Shi'ism, so collecting money for Islamic education is 
no departure.  (NOTE:  His children are said to attend 
western-style private schools in Nigeria.  END NOTE.) 
His appearance at this time is probably not a 
coincidence.  Given the high level of dissatisfaction 
with the recent elections, Zak-Zaky could attempt to 
capitalize opportunistically on the disenchantment of 
a susceptible segment of northern Nigeria's large 
population.  Providing an alternative to the democracy 
that has alienated them, Zak-Zaky's brand of 
traditional Shi'ism could appeal to some in Nigeria's 
northern region who view critically the GON's failure 
to provide infrastructure and social services. 
JETER