This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RANGOON 000484 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/BCLTV 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
USUN FOR TWINING 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/04/2012 
TAGS: PREL PHUM BM ASSK
SUBJECT: ASSK GIVES PRESS A DOWNBEAT ASSESSMENT OF HER YEAR 
OF FREEDOM 
 
Classified By: COM CARMEN M. MARTINEZ FOR REASON 1.5(D). 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary:  Aung San Suu Kyi told reporters and 
diplomats April 23 that her trips to various regions of the 
country reassured her that ethnic groups are anxious for 
national reconciliation.  She provided details on how the 
trips had been marred by attempts to intimidate NLD 
supporters.  ASSK also said there has been no progress on her 
dialogue with the SPDC and that relations have actually 
"digressed" somewhat.  It is becoming clear, she said, that 
the SPDC is simply not interested in national reconciliation. 
 She reiterated that basic NLD policies - on tourism, 
sanctions, investment assistance - will not change until 
there is real dialogue; however, the NLD stands ready to 
cooperate on humanitarian assistance.  Publicly critical of 
the regime for the first time since her release, ASSK 
appeared to be ratcheting up the pressure, if only slightly, 
for the regime to act on commitments for political 
transition.  End Summary. 
 
One-year Assessment 
 
¶2. (SBU)  In a press conference on April 23 at NLD 
headquarters, Aung San Suu Kyi provided an assessment of 
events since her release from house detention almost one year 
ago, on May 6, 2002.  She divided her remarks into two 
general themes: her travels around the country; and the 
status of NLD relations with the regime.  Her travels, she 
said, had demonstrated that the ethnic groups continue to 
have a strong desire to work toward national reconciliation 
if given a chance to participate in a "true union" of Burma. 
She also cited examples, however, of how the trips have been 
marred by authorities harassing her party and intimidating 
people interested in seeing her.  Photos of her recent visit 
to Chin State were on display showing, among other things, 
the large crowds that turned out and the six offices that she 
opened.  Also shown were photos of large logs laid across the 
road to impede her progress by Union Solidarity and 
Development Association (USDA) members and a group of USDA 
members who confronted her party on several occasions.  ASSK 
said that it was obvious that the USDA and Ministry officials 
who visited Chin State to discourage people from turning out 
for her visit were under orders from Rangoon.  She called on 
the SPDC to clarify the role of the USDA and explain why it 
has the power to take such actions if it is, as is claimed, 
only a social and welfare organization. 
 
No Progress On Reconciliation 
 
¶3. (SBU)  ASSK said it was very disappointing that since her 
release last May, the SPDC has not made any attempts to move 
forward with discussions on national reconciliation.  She 
said that her release was supposed to mark a shift from 
confidence building to more substantive exchanges including 
discussions on national reconciliation.  Instead, relations 
have been static and the SPDC seems to want to avoid any 
motion towards national reconciliation.  ASSK made the 
analogy of a child making excuses for not taking a bath; 
after a point it becomes clear that the child just does not 
want the bath.  She said that, based on the SPDC's continued 
avoidance of discussions on national reconciliation the NLD 
has had to conclude that the regime is just not interested. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  ASSK honed in on the insincerity of the SPDC's 
claims that it wants national reconciliation by noting that 
there has been no mention of the NLD or the SPDC's actions 
towards the party in the local media.  The regime's comments 
on reconciliation are always directed at the international 
press and diplomats, she claimed, indicating that the 
comments are intended only to mitigate international 
criticism.  She called on the SPDC to explain why it has 
never published any reports on confidence building, her 
trips, or national reconciliation, in the local press. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  ASSK also took the SPDC to task for its poor 
treatment of UN Special Envoy Razali, noting that if the 
authorities were serious about achieving reconciliation they 
would not restrict his travel to or activities within Burma. 
Specifically, ASSK said the SPDC should not have blocked 
Razali from visiting her in Taunggyi (Shan State) in November 
2002 or delayed his visits to the country, as they are 
reportedly currently doing. 
 
Policies Will Not Change Without Dialogue; Offer Stands For 
Cooperation On Assistance 
 
¶6. (SBU)  ASSK reiterated that with no dialogue on national 
reconciliation, the NLD will not change its basic policies on 
tourism, investment, sanctions, and assistance.  She noted 
that the NLD has continued to make it known that it would 
like to cooperate with the SPDC on humanitarian assistance 
projects but, even on high visibility problems such as 
HIV/AIDS, the authorities have indicated "they are not 
interested in working together." 
 
¶7. (SBU)  In response to a question from an Australian 
reporter (ABC) on the Australian government's decision to 
move toward engagement with the SPDC while the EU and U.S. 
appear to be heading toward tighter sanctions, ASSK said she 
had clearly communicated her disappointment to the Australian 
government on its shift in policy.  She said the SPDC needs 
to be reminded that maintaining the status quo is not 
possible, change is inevitable and they should not attempt to 
block it (noting that as Buddhists they should know and 
accept this). 
 
¶8. (C)  Comment:  This was a more confrontational approach 
from ASSK than we have seen since confidential talks began in 
October 2000.  The lack of progress on dialogue one year 
after her release from house detention, coupled with 
continued and perhaps more systematic harassment on her trips 
around the country, apparently prompted a slight shift in 
strategy.  Still, she was somewhat cautious in her remarks 
and reiterated several times that there are no personal 
animosities between her and the SPDC and that she wants to 
work together for national reconciliation.  She appeared to 
be ratcheting up the pressure, albeit only slightly, for the 
regime to act on previous commitments for political 
transition.  We expect the regime will respond shortly with a 
press conference of its own.  End Comment. 
Martinez