This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 COLOMBO 000476 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA, SA/INS, SA/PD, S/CT, NEA/NGA, 
DS/DSS/ITA, INR/NESA; NSC FOR E. MILLARD 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 03-21-13 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KPAO ASEC CE MV IZ
SUBJECT:  TFIZ01:  GSL releases relatively constructive 
statement; Situation in Sri Lanka/Maldives remains calm 
 
Refs:  (A) State 74254 
 
-      (B) Colombo-SA/INS 03-20-03 fax 
-      (C) Colombo 468, and previous 
-      (D) State 72928 
-      (E) State 72921 
 
(U) Classified by Ambassador E. Ashley Wills. 
Reasons: 1.5 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C/NF) SUMMARY:  The GSL has issued a relatively 
constructive statement re the Iraq situation (text in 
Para 10).  In a meeting late March 20, the PM gave the 
Ambassador the opportunity to help craft the message and 
some improvements were made.  The PM confirmed that the 
GSL would not be able to join the coalition for 
political reasons.  The Sri Lanka/Maldives situation 
remains calm, with some anti-U.S. rallies in the cards. 
Media coverage has spiked up.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C/NF) MEETING WITH PM:  Prime Minister 
Wickremesinghe invited the Ambassador to meet with him 
late March 20.  Foreign Minister Fernando, Foreign 
Secretary Rodrigo, and Bradman Weerakoon, the PM's key 
 
SIPDIS 
assistant, were also present.  At the meeting, the PM 
provided a draft press statement re the Iraq situation 
to Ambassador Wills and asked him to review it.  The PM 
indicated that he was open to any suggestions on ways to 
improve the draft (on the understanding that we would 
not make our involvement known).  After reviewing the 
draft, which was quite long and showed some effect from 
the MFA's NAM, G-77 type of thinking, the Ambassador 
made some suggestions, which the prime minister agreed 
to.  These suggestions were clearly marked in the 
annotated copy of the draft, which was sent to SA/INS in 
Ref A. 
 
¶3.  (C/NF) After the meeting concluded, the MFA issued 
the statement (which included the Ambassador's 
suggestions) on the evening of March 20 (see text 
below).  In our estimation, the statement, while not 
perfect, is relatively constructive in that it cites 
Iraq's failure to disarm.  It also expresses 
"confidence" that the coalition will move to minimize 
any negative impacts the war may have.  On the down 
side, the statement is a bit long, allowing observers to 
pick-and-choose the language they want to focus on, 
including that which gives a bit too much pride-of-place 
to the UN's standing re war and peace issues. 
 
¶4.  (C/NF) As foreshadowed in Ambassador's March 20 
conversation with Sri Lanka's Ambassador to the U.S. 
Devinda Subasinghe (see Ref C), the PM made clear that 
it would not be possible for Sri Lanka to join the 
coalition.  In explaining why, Wickremesinghe stressed 
that it would be difficult politically and 
constitutionally because President Kumaratunga would 
have to be involved in any decision on the issue.  The 
PM did not think she would be at all helpful on the 
matter and it was best not to move forward with 
something so controversial at this point.  (Note:  The 
Ambassador is slated to meet with the president on March 
25, after her return from Europe.) 
 
¶5.  (S/NF) The Ambassador also used the meeting to 
review with the prime minister Ref E points arguing for 
the immediate closure of the Iraqi embassy and the 
expulsion of its personnel.  The Ambassador also 
provided the PM Ref D points providing legal 
justification for the war.  The PM took both sets of 
points on board.  (Note:  Mission has conveyed Ref A 
points re keeping the Iraq issue in the UNSC to the Sri 
Lankan and Maldivian governments.) 
 
¶6.  (C) SRI LANKA/MALDIVES SITUATION:  The general 
situation in Sri Lanka and the Maldives continues to be 
calm.  Since the start of military operations against 
the Iraqi regime early March 20 (local time), we have 
not heard of any serious disturbances in Sri Lanka. 
There reportedly have been several marches by small 
groups of Muslims at various places in Sri Lanka, but 
nothing large and nothing violent.  As mentioned in Ref 
B, however, a test for the security situation will come 
after the conclusion of Muslim prayers today, Friday, 
March 21, when some Muslims and leftists plan a rally in 
Colombo.  Rallies at other sites around the island are 
also planned. 
 
¶7.  (C) Mission continues to pick up all the right 
signals from the GSL re security issues.  The DCM 
attended a meeting of the diplomatic corps on March 20, 
where Interior Minister Amaratunga promised full 
security support.  Amaratunga noted specifically that no 
demonstrations would be allowed anywhere near the U.S. 
and UK embassies, which are located next to each other 
in downtown Colombo.  At embassy's request, security 
forces remain in place, guarding Mission homes. 
 
¶8.  (C) MEDIA COVERAGE:  As could be expected, Sri 
Lankan media coverage of the situation has spiked up and 
March 21 papers are full of news articles on the start 
of military operations.  Editorial opinion re the war 
continues to be largely negative toward the U.S., 
including this March 21 sample entitled "Will War on 
Iraq free U.S. from Terrorists threat?" from the 
Opposition English-language daily ISLAND: 
 
"...the question arises whether elimination of the 
Saddam Hussein regime will rid America and European 
nations from the threat of terrorism.  The war in 
Afghanistan and driving out the Taliban regime have not 
eliminated Al-Qaida and its leader Bin Ladin.  Even US 
intelligence agencies such as the CIA and FBI have said 
openly that America will not be free of terrorist 
attacks.  Much progress has been made in the global war 
on terrorism and President Bush has been receiving a 
good response to his appeal from most countries, 
including many Islamic states.  But it is evident that 
he is jeopardizing his global effort on terrorism with 
this war which has proven to be much unpopular." 
 
(Note:  Additional media coverage is contained in 
Septel.)  (Note:  Coverage of the situation on the 
Maldivian government website "Haveeru.com.mv" continues 
to consist primarily of AFP wire-service reports.  There 
are also some local postings stressing that the GoRM is 
keeping apprised of the situation, and working to 
ameliorate any potentially negative impacts on tourism 
and other elements of the local economy.) 
 
¶9.  (C) COMMENT:  Mission has received truly 
extraordinary support from the GSL, which has gone out 
of its way to be as helpful as possible in meeting our 
security concerns.  The next several days should tell 
how serious any adverse reaction to the U.S.-led action 
may or may not be.  On the political side, although the 
government's statement may not have been helpful as we 
would have liked (despite our best efforts), the PM went 
out of his way to try to craft it so that it was 
reasonably constructive and we think he succeeded in 
large part.  END COMMENT. 
 
¶10.  (U) The text of the Sri Lankan MFA's public 
statement re the Iraq situation follows: 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
 
March 20 Press Release:  Situation in Iraq 
 
Sri Lanka has consistently urged Iraq to comply fully 
with the United Nations Security Council resolutions 
obliging it to eliminate weapons of mass destruction. 
 
Until now there has been a lack of full compliance with 
these resolutions.  Therefore, the elimination of 
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq has not been 
completed through peaceful means.  Unfortunately, the 
lack of concurrence in the Security Council on how to 
proceed with its own Resolution 1441 adopted unanimously 
has led to the collapse of the UN process. 
 
Sri Lanka is greatly disturbed by the outbreak of this 
conflict in the Middle East.  Sri Lanka is gravely 
concerned about the massive political, economic, social, 
and above all, humanitarian consequences that would 
ensue in the military conflict, affecting Iraq, the 
Middle East region and indeed international peace and 
security.  We express confidence that the coalition 
partners would move early to minimize adverse 
consequences on the civilian population in Iraq and, in 
association with other members of the international 
community, coordinate rehabilitation efforts in the 
country. 
 
Beyond the current issue, the UN must continue to play 
an undiminished role in other situations of tension such 
as, in particular, the question of Palestine.  There 
should be substantial progress towards an enduring and 
just peace in which the States of Palestine and Israel 
can develop in peace, freedom and mutual trust within 
secure boundaries in accordance with the Security 
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 
(2002). 
 
The all pervasive evil of terrorism must not at this 
stage be permitted to exploit and thrive on the global 
uncertainty and tension which have now been heightened. 
The international consensus and collective will to 
eradicate all forms and manifestations of terrorism, 
wherever and in whatever circumstances it occurs, must 
not be deflected or blunted.  Terrorism should not be 
identified and stereotyped with any particular religion, 
nationality or civilization. 
 
Sri Lanka is conscious of the hardships and dangers that 
this military conflict would pose to millions of migrant 
workers in the Middle-East region, including to several 
hundred thousands of our own nationals.  Our Missions in 
the region are working closely with the host governments 
concerned to ensure the safety and security of Sri 
Lankans and their well-being in the present volatile 
situation. 
 
Other ramifications stemming from the instability in the 
Middle -East extend to Sri Lanka as well.  In this 
context, therefore, the Government has taken necessary 
steps to coordinate a program whereby essential food 
stocks such as rice, flour, sugar, lentils and milk 
products, supplies of fuel and other necessities could 
be ensured without interruption and at fair prices for 
consumers in the country.  To this end, the Articles and 
Services (Maintenance) Bill was passed unanimously today 
in the Sri Lankan Parliament. 
 
It is tragic in the current dangerous situation that the 
UN system, in particular the Security Council, has been 
rendered ineffective, and apparently, even abandoned due 
to disagreement among its members.  Sri Lanka 
nevertheless continues to firmly believe that issues 
affecting international peace and security should be as 
far as possible identified, considered and resolved 
through the UN, the primary global institution through 
which the will of the international community can be 
legitimately expressed. 
 
Therefore, it is essential that the role of the UN and 
its credibility and authority be restored and respected. 
The Government will continue to monitor closely the 
complex implications of the situation in Iraq.  Sri 
Lanka will also seek to work closely with like-minded 
countries in the national and collective imperative to 
keep United Nations alive. 
 
Sri Lanka urges a quick end to this crisis based on the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and the 
safety, security and welfare of its people. 
 
END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  (U) Minimize considered. 
 
WILLS