This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SANAA 001441 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/22/2013 
TAGS: PTER PREL PGOV PINR TERFIN
SUBJECT: ROYG APPEAL ON AL-MOAYED CASE 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 175378 B. SANAA 1411 
 
Classified By: CDA ALAN G. MISENHEIMER FOR REASONS 1.5 (B)AND (D) 
 
 1.(S)  On 6/21, Polecon Chief delivered reftel response to 
President Saleh's request for special consideration in the 
extradition case of Mohammed al-Moayed to the Foreign 
Minister's Office Director, Marwan Noman.  Noman promised to 
forward the response immediately to Foreign Minister 
al-Qirbi, who is traveling with President Saleh's party in 
Germany.  (The Charge also gave the response directly by 
telephone to Saleh's advisor, Mohammed Sudam, in Germany. 
Septel.) 
 
¶2. (S) Noman repeated many of the points raised by FM 
al-Qirbi in his 6/18 conversation with Charge (Ref B). 
-  President Salih faces great pressure to save al-Moayed 
from extradition to the U.S. 
-  The pressure increased after media reports on the alleged 
poor state of Al-Moayed's health and the isolation in which 
he is confined by German authorities. 
-  Many people fear that his treatment would be even worse in 
the United States. 
-  In these circumstances, President Saleh must do his best 
for a deserving Yemeni citizen; people will be watching and 
judging his efforts. 
-  Therefore, Saleh authorized official funds for al-Moayed's 
defense, is personnally appealing to the U.S. for a political 
solution, and has scheduled meetings in Germany with top 
officials to press the case. 
 
¶3. (C) Noman concluded with comments he described as purely 
personal:  The al-Moayed case would bring "trouble no one 
needs".  The U.S. should have brought its charges directly to 
Yemeni authorities, rather than giving the perception that 
al-Moayad had been "kidnapped" in Germany.   Finally, as a 
lawyer himself, he thought the case was "very weak" because 
it relied on a paid informer. PolEcon chief reminded Noman 
that al-Moayed and his associate,  Mohammed Mohsen Yahya, are 
answering the charges against them in a fair, impartial 
German court. If extradition is granted, they will have every 
opportunity to defend themselves in an equally fair American 
court. 
 
¶4. (C) Comment: The al-Moayed case is a difficult issue for 
the ROYG because it demonstrates its lack of international 
influence. Saleh's last minute involvement may have been an 
effort to show his good intentions to al-Moayed's supporters, 
but they will portray his failure to deliver al-Moayed as 
weakness. End Comment. 
MISENHEIMER