This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KUWAIT 003946 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/ARP, NEA/PPD, PA, INR/NESA, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA, INR/B 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE 
LONDON FOR GOLDRICH, PARIS FOR O'FRIEL 
SECDEF FOR OASD/PA 
CINCCENT FOR CCPA 
USDOC FOR 4520/ANESA/ONE/FITZGERALD-WILKS 
USDOC FOR ITA AND PTO/OLIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KU KDMR
SUBJECT: KUWAIT MEDIA REACTION, AUGUST 21-24: UN 
HEADQUARTERS BOMBING; HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT; US CIVIL 
LIBERTIES; ARMITAGE INTERVIEW ON AL-JAZEERA; TERRORISM 
 
 
¶1.   SUMMARY: In an interview with Al-Qabas, Senator Kay 
Bailey Hutchison stated that despite the bombing of the UN 
headquarters in Baghdad, "we are committed to continuing our 
mission in Iraq." All papers report increased security 
around foreign missions in Kuwait in response to the attack 
in Baghdad. 
 
One newspaper reports that the National Assembly is 
preparing a response to the State Department's Human Rights 
Report on Kuwait. One commentator seizes on the recent 
anniversary of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s "I have a dream" 
speech to rail against the "Zionist lobby and right-wing 
radical plan to deny civil liberties" to Muslims in the US, 
and the "failure of the American dream." A National Review 
Online article praising Kuwait's religious tolerance 
received coverage in all newspapers. 
 
All newspapers report Deputy Secretary of State Armitage's 
comments on Al-Jazeera that foreign fighters are 
infiltrating Iraq from Syria, Saudi Arabia and Iran. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   News Stories: Al-Watan, Al-Rai Al-Aam and Al-Seyassah 
reported on their August 24 front pages comments made by 
Deputy Secretary Armitage during a televised interview on Al- 
Jazeera, highlighting his remarks that foreign fighters are 
entering Iraq from Syria, Saudi Arabia and Iran. 
 
All newspapers report condemnation by the Council of 
Ministers (Cabinet) of the "shameful, criminal" attack 
against the UN headquarters in Baghdad and denounced Israeli 
brutal acts against the Palestinian people, especially 
political assassinations. 
 
Al-Qabas reports that according to Minister of Defense, 
Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak, 40 countries have requested 
permission for their peacekeeping troops en route to Iraq to 
transit through Kuwait, including Japan. 
 
Kuwaiti security forces will increase their guard around the 
Kuwait UN headquarters and around foreign embassies in light 
of the attack on the UN headquarters in Baghdad, according 
to Al-Watan. 
 
Al-Qabas reports in an August 22 interview with Senator Kay 
Hutchison that despite the bombing of the UN headquarters in 
Baghdad, "we are committed to continuing our mission in 
Iraq." 
 
Al-Anba reports that the National Assembly's Human Rights 
Committee is preparing a detailed report to respond to the 
State Department's Human Rights Report on Kuwait. 
 
All newspapers carried stories summarizing an article from 
the National Review Online, written by Doug Bandow, and 
praising religious tolerance in Kuwait. 
 
Al-Anba and Al-Rai Al-Aam reported on August 24 that a 
female member of the US Air Force was allegedly raped by an 
Arab waiter in one of the Kuwait's five star hotels. 
 
All newspapers report that Kuwaiti authorities halted an 
attempt to smuggle 15 kilograms of hashish hidden in a 
tanker truck from Iraq into Kuwait. 
 
Editorials: 
 
¶3. Liberal Sami Al-Nesf wrote in independent Al-Anba (8/23): 
"People who hate Iraq and the Iraqis and want to cause a 
civil war in Iraq are the ones behind the attack on the UN 
building in Iraq. Needless to say, it was Saddam and the 
criminal Baath organization behind the attack." 
 
¶4.  "De Mello and Terrorism" 
Dr. Ayed Al-Manna wrote in independent Al-Watan (8/23): 
"Terrorists know that the UN is not a part in the war to 
liberate Iraq. The UN did not issue any resolution for that 
war. [UN Representative Sergio] De Mello came to Iraq to 
provide humanitarian assistance for the Iraqi people.  Those 
who attacked De Mello were targeting the organization he 
represented. They believe that they can force the UN to 
abandon its mission in Iraq and thus facilitate the return 
of the oppressor to power." 
 
¶5.  "The 40th Anniversary of Martin Luther [King, Jr.] and 
the American Dream Disappointment" 
Islamist Adel Al-Qassar wrote in independent Al-Qabas 
(8/24):  "Martin Luther [King, Jr.] dreamt of implementing 
justice and freedom. but today we are experiencing a relapse 
in civil rights which has led many people to hate the US. 
The Patriot Act and the Secret Evidence law implemented 
after the September 11 attacks have caused many worries. 
The Zionist lobby and right wing radicals planned these 
measures in order to exclude Arabs and Muslims from the 
political arena. Is America waiting for a Muslim Martin 
Luther [King, Jr.].?" 
 
¶6. Adel Al-Qassar wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/24):  "At 
the time when the Human Rights Committee of Kuwait's 
Ministry of Justice is preparing responses to US State 
Department criticism regarding issues such as women's 
political rights, we read in the American press that 
American authorities have fired a Muslim police officer in 
Philadelphia for wearing a hijab [head scarf] during office 
hours." 
 
¶7.  "Unsuccessful Efforts to Confront Terrorism" 
Dr. Wael Al-Hassawi wrote in independent Al-Rai Al-Aam 
(8/21):  "We are not against measures adopted by countries 
to counter terrorism, but we are rather against the methods 
adopted by some countries in the name of fighting terrorism. 
We believe that these methods will not help root out 
terrorism, but will rather aggravate the situation. 
[Instead,] Muslim youth must learn to differentiate between 
the concept of jihad and terrorism and criminal acts. The 
governments of Islamic countries must reform their internal 
systems to prevent their subjects from falling prey to 
injustice, while striving to enforce Islamic Sharia in the 
name of containing terrorism." 
 
¶8.  "Where Are We Versus the Zionist Media?" 
Bader Al-Ibrahim wrote in independent Al-Qabas (8/21): 
"Unfortunately, the Zionist media has managed to influence 
Western public opinion, institutions and governments to such 
an extent that relevant Western governments did their utmost 
to establish a Jewish democratic state in Palestine and to 
help Jews emigrate there. The challenges facing the Arab 
world are great, and we must form a unified media strategy 
to penetrate the Zionist media in order to change our image 
in the Western media." 
 
URBANCIC