This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS KATHMANDU 000621 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR SA/INS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PREL NP
SUBJECT: NEPAL:  MAOISTS ASK TO MEET AMBASSADOR 
 
REF: A. (A) STATE 74113 
 
     ¶B. (B) KATHMANDU 0572 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  On April 4 the Embassy received what appeared to 
be a form letter addressed to "Your Excellency the 
Ambassador/Consular" and signed by Maoist second-in-command 
Baburam Bhattarai inviting the Ambassador or his 
representative to "a goodwill meeting" with the five-man 
negotiating team.  The letter, which was dated April 2, 
follows two telephone calls received April 3 from go-betweens 
requesting a meeting with the Ambassador. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The letter listed five of "our more important 
policy commitments" to enable better understanding of the 
"context" of the proposed meeting.  First, the Maoists 
committed to observing the ceasefire and to ensuring 
successful negotiations, the letter claimed, but "the old 
monarchical state with its known retrogressive intentions" 
persists in violating the ceasefire.  Second, "as the 
international community very well knows, there are virtually 
two states, two armies and two thoughts/cultures contending 
for supremacy in the country."  These two forces have entered 
into a stalemate, as manifested by the ceasefire.  Because 
the conflict will only continue absent a "progressive 
political solution," the letter urges all parties to focus on 
finding that solution, "rather than to get bogged down in 
minor 'rehabilitation' or 'development' issues."  Third, the 
international community should recognize there is 
"overwhelming support" for the Maoists' proposed constituent 
assembly and should "help in whatever way it can to 
materialize this most democratic option right now."  Fourth, 
the Maoists profess to be committed to "a multiparty 
political system" and "real democracy" for all oppressed 
peoples and do not seek a one-party dictatorship.  Fifth, the 
Maoists seek "cordial and mutually beneficial relations" 
based on the principles of peaceful coexistence with all 
countries, especially India and China. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Comment:  The language, syntax and some of the 
phrasing in the letter track closely with statements 
Bhattarai made in a March 30 press conference (Ref B), 
suggesting that Bhattarai might have cut and pasted this 
letter from a prepared text read at that venue.  The 
dismissal of "minor rehabilitation and development 
issues"--which, apparently, the Maoists do not see as an 
important part of "a progressive political solution"--as an 
appropriate topic may be intended to counter the Government's 
stated preference to begin talks by addressing socio-economic 
issues, where areas of agreement may be more numerous.    By 
positing the existence of "two states," the Maoists are 
justifying their request for a meeting at the Ambassadorial 
level and their interest in pursuing their own foreign 
policy.  Their willingness to meet with the Ambassador's 
"representative" may suggest that they realize the request is 
unlikely to be granted at the level desired.  The Embassy is 
reviewing its response to this letter, based on the guidance 
provided in Ref A, and in coordination with the British and 
Indian Embassies, which have received similar overtures. 
MALINOWSKI