This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L AMMAN 005971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/16/2013 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM SOCI JO
SUBJECT: GOJ CALLS U.S.-JORDAN-IRAQI FRATRICIDE INCIDENT AT 
FALLUJA "UNINTENTIONAL", WHILE MP'S CONDEMN IT; PRESS 
CRITICIZES GOJ REACTION 
 
Classified By: CDA David Hale for Reasons 1.5 (B) and (D) 
 
---------------- 
OFFICIAL REACTION 
----------------- 
 
¶1. (U)  Acting PM Faris Nabulsi stated that the September 12 
U.S.-Jordan-Iraqi fratricide incident at Falluja, was 
"unintentional" and would not deter the GOJ from its 
commitment to assist the Iraqi people.  In that incident at 
the Jordanian military hospital, a Jordanian sergeant was 
killed, and four other Jordanians wounded, in addition to 10 
Iraqi police, who were killed.  Nabulsi, answering MPs' 
questions in the Lower House September 14, described the 
incident "as an attack on the hospital perpetrated by armed 
Iraqis which led to clashes between the Iraqis and U.S. 
special forces."  He added that U.S. forces had apologized to 
the GOJ and its armed forces and that Secretary Powell had 
expressed his regrets to Foreign Minister Muasher.  Reports 
on these apologies were featured on the front page of all 
local dailies. 
 
------------ 
MPs REACTION 
------------ 
 
¶2. (U) Members of Jordan's Lower House of Parliament 
condemned the U.S. attack.  Some deputies demanded a "clear 
and frank apology" for the incident.  Islamic Action Front 
MP, Zuhair Abul Ragheb, claimed the attack was intentional. 
He called on the GOJ to hold American forces responsible for 
the attack and to seek compensation of "at least" USD 10 
million for the family of the deceased.  Abul Ragheb added, 
"Jordanian blood is not worth less than that of Americans". 
 
-------------- 
PRESS REACTION 
-------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Press reaction, while muted, condemned the attack. 
Taher al-Udwan, editor-in-chief of Al-Arab Al-Yawm, an 
independent mass-appeal Arabic daily, called it a 
"disgraceful" incident and the fact that it was caused by 
"friendly fire" made it even "uglier".  He further questioned 
how such an accident could occur when signs in both Arabic 
and English identify the building as a Jordanian military 
hospital.  Samih Al-Ma'aytah, also writing in Al-Arab 
Al-Yawm, criticized the GOJ for calling the perpetrators of 
the incident as "unknown", while publishing the U.S. apology. 
 He opined that Jordanian-American relations can weather 
direct criticism by the GOJ against the U.S.  Yasser 
Za'atreh, of the center-left Arabic daily Al-Dustour, took a 
more extremist approach when he stated that "the complex of 
fear pushes U.S. soldiers to mistrust and shoot at anything 
that moves in Iraq, including Iraqi policemen and those 
guarding the Jordanian hospital."  He added, "their apology 
is rejected, and if the people of Falluja will avenge their 
martyrs, then our martyr is their son too, because the blood 
is one, when facing the invaders." 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4. (C)  GOJ officials have done their best to minimize the 
public impact of the attack on the Falluja hospital; as part 
of that effort, they have asked us to minimize further 
statements on the incident, grateful as they are for our 
quick responses.  Jordanian Charge in Baghdad told PolCouns 
the morning after the attack that he did not want the 
incident to damage public support for future GOJ support to 
rebuilding Iraq.  He told us September 15 that the Parliament 
and press reaction was more muted than they had feared.  End 
Comment. 
 
¶5. (U) Baghdad minimize considered. 
HALE