This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 000448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE PASS USDOL ILAB 
STATE ALSO PASS USAID FOR ANTOINETTE FERRARA 
STATE ALSO PASS USTR FOR EBRYAN 
PHNOM PENH FOR USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB EAID ECON ETRD VM HUMANR LABOR
SUBJECT: VIETNAM:  LAUNCH OF CHILD LABOR COOPERATION PROJECT 
 
REF: 02 HANOI 2914 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  On February 18, the sixth and final U.S. 
Department of Labor (USDOL) funded project, the National 
Program for the Prevention and Elimination of Child Labor, 
officially commenced.  This project focuses on the 
prevention and elimination of child labor by strengthening 
the capacity of government, mass organizations and civil 
society to address the problems of the worst forms of child 
labor through the prevention, protection and removal from 
dangerous work of children who are at the greatest risk.  As 
Vietnam's economy transforms, there has been both a dramatic 
fall in the numbers of children participating in economic 
activities and the growth of new forms of vulnerabilities. 
Prior to this project Vietnam had already begun to address 
the issue through such actions as the ratification of ILO 
Convention 182.  However, this program presents an 
opportunity to bring together the various stakeholders in a 
more cohesive and comprehensive approach.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) Continuing implementation of the 2000 U.S.-Vietnam 
Memorandum of Understanding on Labor (MOU) and its 
accompanying technical assistance programs (see reftel), the 
U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL) funded National Program for 
the Prevention and Elimination of Child Labor was officially 
launched on February 18.  This 30-month, $500,000 program 
focuses on the prevention and elimination of child labor by 
strengthening the capacity of government, mass organizations 
and civil society to address the problems of the worst forms 
of child labor through the prevention, protection and 
removal from dangerous work of children who are at the 
greatest risk.  It is being executed by the International 
Labor Organization (ILO) Program on the Elimination of Child 
Labor (IPEC) in collaboration with Vietnam's Ministry of 
Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA), the Ministry of 
Education and Training, provincial governments, Vietnam 
General Confederation of Labor (VGCL), the Vietnam Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry (VCCI), and the Vietnam Cooperative 
Alliance (VCA).  These bodies will cooperate to carry out 
research, raise awareness, review national laws, and promote 
the creation of community-based monitoring of child labor. 
In addition to working to progressively eliminate child 
labor in selected hazardous sectors by removing a total of 
approximately 1500 children from work, the program will 
provide these children with social protection services. 
Furthermore, recognizing that the issue of the child labor 
cannot be resolved without creating alternative sources of 
income, the program will enable family members of former 
working children to access income generation and training 
activities. 
¶3.  (U) At the official launch ceremony, speakers from 
MOLISA, the ILO, the provinces and Embassy highlighted 
Vietnam's continuing efforts in this area, including the 
ratification of ILO Convention 182 on the Prohibition and 
Immediate Action on the Worst Forms of Child Labor and the 
creation of a Draft National Plan of Action on Child Labor. 
They pointed out that as Vietnam's economy transforms, there 
has been, in general terms, a dramatic fall in the numbers 
of children participating in economic activities.  However, 
reports indicate a rise in internal migration and the 
numbers of displaced and unregistered families and children 
found in urban centers.  Children and young people can now 
be found in informal work arrangements that are unsupervised 
and unregulated.  U.S. DCM emphasized that we are especially 
concerned about children, who work long hours, sometimes 
away from home, under exploitative, socially unjust or 
hazardous conditions, with little or no pay, and who are 
deprived of their right to health, education and future 
development. 
¶4.  (SBU) COMMENT AND RECOMMENDATION:  The GVN, having 
approved the project in March 2002, has been anxiously 
awaiting its launch while the ILO worked through its own 
internal process.  A number of issues still need to be 
addressed between USDOL and the National Project Manager. 
Post therefore, recommends that the USDOL International 
Program Analyst come to Vietnam as soon as possible for in- 
country consultations. 
¶5.  (SBU) COMMENT CONT'D:  With this program underway, all 
six projects outlined in the bilateral MOU have begun.  As 
we approach this year's bilateral labor dialogue, the future 
of this excellent cooperation program should be discussed. 
While the approval process was neither quick nor easy, the 
GVN is enthusiastically implementing all six projects with 
excellent results. The MOU has provided an important tool to 
advancing labor issues in Vietnam.  Post recommends 
consideration of additional programs that could fall under 
the MOU. 
BURGHARDT